Certificate-Only Causal Discovery: Anytime-Valid
            Adjacency and Orientation

                             Quang-Vinh Dang1*
           1*
                British University Vietnam, Hung Yen, Vietnam.


      Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): vinh.dq4@buv.edu.vn;


                                     Abstract
 Constraint-based causal discovery removes an edge when a conditional-
 independence test fails to reject, converting absence of evidence into evidence of
 absence. This is why finite-sample correctness for such methods requires faith-
 fulness, and it is why their output cannot distinguish a feature the data support
 from one about which nothing was learned. We develop a discovery algorithm
 built on a single rule: assert a feature of the graph only by rejecting a null that
 is true whenever that feature is absent, and never assert anything by failing to
 reject. Two certificates implement the rule. For adjacency, the statement “some
 conditioning set separates the pair” is a union null, and the minimum of the per-
 set e-processes is an e-process for it; crossing a threshold certifies an edge under
 the Markov condition alone, with no faithfulness assumption. For orientation,
 the two directions of a pair induce different joint densities under a linear non-
 Gaussian model, so a sequential universal-inference e-process against the reversed
 factorisation certifies an arrowhead, and abstains automatically under Gaussian
 noise, where the direction is not identified. Both certificates are anytime-valid,
 so the estimate may be monitored continuously and the run stopped by any
 data-dependent rule. The resulting algorithm, CERT-CD, grows from the empty
 graph, reports undecided pairs as undecided, and bounds by α the probability
 that any certified edge or arrowhead is ever wrong, uniformly over time. On
 simulated instances that violate δ-strong faithfulness, CERT-CD stays within
 its budget while methods that delete on non-rejection lose a true edge in most
 runs; on premise-satisfying instances it orients 96% of certified edges, against a
 Markov-equivalence-class ceiling of 33%. On the observational protein-signalling
 data of Sachs and colleagues the two halves of the output diverge instructively:
 every certified edge lies in the published consensus skeleton, while every certified
 arrowhead is reversed relative to it—a disagreement we trace to the linear non-
 Gaussian model rather than to the inferential machinery, since DirectLiNGAM
 reverses the same arcs.



                                          1
     Keywords: causal discovery, e-values, anytime-valid inference, safe testing,
     family-wise error rate, LiNGAM

     MSC Classification: 62H22 , 62L12 , 62F03




1 Introduction
A causal discovery algorithm returns a graph, and a practitioner reading that graph
would like to know which of its features the data support. Causal graphical mod-
els have become a standard language for that question (Pearl, 2009; Peters, Janzing,
& Schölkopf, 2017), and the algorithms that estimate them from observational data
are correspondingly consequential. Methods in the constraint-based tradition—PC,
FCI and their descendants (Colombo, Maathuis, Kalisch, & Richardson, 2012; Spirtes,
Glymour, & Scheines, 2000; Spirtes, Meek, & Richardson, 1995)—answer this ques-
tion poorly, and the reason is structural rather than incidental. They begin from the
complete graph and delete an edge whenever a conditional-independence test fails to
reject. Failure to reject is not evidence of independence. It is compatible with inde-
pendence, with a dependence too weak for the test to see at the current sample size,
and with a test that had little power against the alternative in question. The deletion
happens regardless, and the resulting absence of an edge is reported with the same
authority as the presence of one.
    Two consequences follow, and both are well known in their separate literatures.
First, finite-sample guarantees for these methods require faithfulness or a quantitative
strengthening of it, because only such an assumption converts “the test did not reject”
into “the variables are independent”. Robins, Scheines, Spirtes, and Wasserman (2003)
showed that no uniformly consistent estimator of causal structure exists without such
a strengthening, and Uhler, Raskutti, Bühlmann, and Yu (2013) showed that the set
of parameter values violating λ-strong faithfulness has substantial measure even in
modest graphs. The assumption is doing work the data cannot do. Second, the output
of these methods is two-valued where the evidence is three-valued: a missing edge
means either “the data indicate no edge” or “nothing was established about this pair”,
and the graph does not say which.
    This paper takes the opposite discipline. We adopt a single rule and follow it to
its consequences:
  Assert a feature of the graph only by rejecting a null hypothesis that is true whenever that
  feature is absent. Never assert anything by failing to reject.

    We call this the certificate-only rule, and an assertion licensed by such a rejection a
certificate. The rule is restrictive, and its consequences are not cosmetic. An algorithm
obeying it cannot begin from the complete graph, because it has no licence to delete; it
must begin from the empty graph and add. It cannot report an edge as absent, only as
undecided. And the quantity it controls is the probability of asserting something false,
not the probability of missing something true. Power becomes a descriptive property
of a run rather than part of the guarantee.


                                               2
   Making the rule operational requires two certificates, and their statistical situations
are quite different.

Adjacency.
For a pair (i, j ), the null that is true whenever the edge is absent is composite: some
conditioning set separates them. This is a union over conditioning sets, and the min-
imum of the per-set e-processes is an e-process for a union null (Section 4). Two
consequences matter more than the construction itself. Validity uses no faithfulness
assumption—if i and j are non-adjacent in the true graph then pa(i) or pa(j ) separates
them, so the null holds and Ville’s inequality applies—and the multiplicity correction
runs over pairs rather than over (pair, conditioning set) triples, because one hypothesis
is tested per pair.

Orientation.
Orientation error is not uncontrolled in the literature. PC-p (Strobl, Spirtes, &
Visweswaran, 2019) attaches edge-specific p-values to unshielded colliders and Meek-
rule orientations and controls their false discovery rate; Shimizu and Kano (2008)
test the direction of causation between two variables using non-normality; Strieder
and Drton (2023) construct confidence statements for causal effects under structure
uncertainty. What has not been available is orientation error control that is simulta-
neously finite-sample, time-uniform, family-wise over a whole graph, and not confined
to the Markov equivalence class. Constraint-based orientation tests are confined to
that class by construction, so an edge lying in no v-structure is unorientable in prin-
ciple by any of them. The functional-model methods that escape the class—LiNGAM
and its descendants (Hyvärinen & Smith, 2013; Shimizu, Hoyer, Hyvärinen, & Ker-
minen, 2006; Shimizu et al., 2011)—choose a direction by comparing scores, and the
comparison itself carries no error statement. Under a linear non-Gaussian model the
two orientations of a pair induce different joint densities and exactly one is correct, so
“the direction is j → i” is a genuine null hypothesis; a sequential universal-inference
e-process against it certifies the arrowhead i → j (Section 5). Under Gaussian noise
the two factorisations are observationally indistinguishable, the process does not grow,
and no certificate is issued—the procedure abstains exactly where the direction is
unidentified, without being told to.

Why anytime-valid.
Both certificates are built as e-processes rather than as fixed-sample tests, and the
choice is not decorative. A discovery run on streaming or accumulating data invites
the analyst to look at the current graph, and looking is a form of optional stopping.
A fixed-sample guarantee is void the moment the analyst stops on the basis of what
they saw. Section 9.2 quantifies the gap: at nominal α = 0.05, a Fisher-z test inspected
after every observation rejects a true null in 34.6% of runs, against 5.6% when it is
evaluated once. An e-process pays for time-uniformity in power, and we report that
price rather than eliding it.




                                            3
Contributions.
The paper makes four.
1. An e-process for the composite separability null, obtained as a minimum over condi-
   tioning sets, giving time-uniform certification of adjacency under the Markov con-
   dition and a bound on separator size, with no faithfulness assumption (Section 4).
   We give the exact per-set primitive for the linear-Gaussian case in closed form,
   together with the confidence sequence obtained by inverting it.
2. A sequential certificate for causal orientation (Section 5) that is valid at any
   stopping time, is not confined to the Markov equivalence class, and abstains auto-
   matically under Gaussianity. We identify a requirement the construction imposes
   on the fitting procedure—the null-model fit must genuinely attain its supremum—
   which is easy to violate and which silently inflates the e-process when violated
   (Section 5.3).
3. CERT-CD, an algorithm combining both certificates under one budget (Section 6).
   Its output is a three-valued graph in which every asserted edge and arrowhead
   carries a certificate and undecided pairs are explicit, with a whole-graph guarantee
   that is proved rather than assumed.
4. An empirical study (Section 9) that stratifies instances by whether the premise of
   the competing guarantee holds, rather than pooling them; measures the assump-
   tions of our own theorem instead of asserting them; reports the regimes in which
   the certificates are void (Section 9.11); and applies the method to the observational
   protein-signalling data of Sachs, Perez, Pe’er, Lauffenburger, and Nolan (2005),
   where the adjacency and orientation halves of the output behave very differently.
   We are explicit throughout about which components are standard. Section 8 gives
that accounting in detail, including three claims of novelty we made in earlier drafts
and then withdrew after reading the prior art.

Notation and outline.
Section 2 fixes notation and reviews e-processes and the graphical setting. Section 3
states the certificate-only rule formally and derives its structural consequences.
Sections 4 and 5 develop the two certificates. Section 6 assembles CERT-CD and proves
the whole-graph guarantee; Section 7 extends it to latent confounders. Section 8 posi-
tions the work. Section 9 reports experiments and Section 10 discusses limitations.
Proofs and derivations omitted from the main text are in the appendices.

2 Background
2.1 E-variables, e-processes and Ville’s inequality
Let (Ω, F, (Ft )t≥0 , P) be a filtered probability space and let H0 be a set of distributions
on it.

Definition 1 (E-variable) A non-negative random variable E is an e-variable for H0 if
EP [E] ≤ 1 for every P ∈ H0 .


                                             4
Definition 2 (E-process) A non-negative, adapted process (Et )t≥0 is an e-process for H0
if EP [Eτ ] ≤ 1 for every P ∈ H0 and every stopping time τ (finite or not, with E∞ :=
lim inf t Et ).


    Every non-negative supermartingale starting at one is an e-process, by optional
stopping (Shafer & Vovk, 2019); the converse fails, and the distinction matters for
composite nulls, where an e-process need not be a supermartingale under any single
null distribution (Ramdas, Grünwald, Vovk, & Shafer, 2023). Both of our constructions
are e-processes that are dominated pointwise by a P -supermartingale for each P ∈
H0 , with the dominating process depending on P . That is the standard route to an
e-process for a composite null, and it is the route both proofs below take.
    The operational content of Definition 2 is Ville’s inequality (Ville, 1939): for an
e-process (Et ) and any α ∈ (0, 1),
                                           
                    P ∃ t ≥ 0 : Et ≥ 1/α       ≤ α     for every P ∈ H0 .                   (1)

The quantifier is inside the probability. This is what licenses continuous monitoring:
an analyst may inspect the evidence after every observation and stop whenever they
wish, and the probability that the process ever crosses the threshold under the null
is still at most α. A p-value offers no analogue. A fixed-sample p-value controls the
rejection probability at one pre-specified sample size, and the guarantee is destroyed
by looking; the phenomenon is familiar from sequential clinical trials and from online
experimentation (Johari, Koomen, Pekelis, & Walsh, 2022).
    E-values also compose in ways p-values do not, and we use two such composition
                                                     (1)          (m)
rules. If E (1) , . . . , E (m) are e-variables for H0 , . . . , H0     then mink E (k) is an e-
             S         (k)                               P          (k)
                                                                                     P
variable for k H0 , and any convex combination k wk E with wk ≥ 0, k wk = 1
                            T    (k)
is an e-variable for k H0 , under arbitrary dependence between the components
(Vovk & Wang, 2021). The first rule is what makes the adjacency certificate possible;
the second is what makes the multiplicity discussion of Section 6.4 non-trivial.
    Recent work has developed e-processes for a wide range of settings—bounded
means (Waudby-Smith & Ramdas, 2024), linear models (Lindon, Ham, Tingley, &
Bojinov, 2026), stratified counts (Turner & Grünwald, 2023)—and has characterised
admissible constructions (Ramdas et al., 2023). Two general recipes recur below. The
first is the method of mixtures : under a group-invariant null, integrating the likeli-
hood ratio against the right-Haar measure on the nuisance group yields an exact test
martingale (Berger, Pericchi, & Varshavsky, 1998; Grünwald, de Heide, & Koolen,
2024; Hendriksen, de Heide, & Grünwald, 2021). Section 4.3 instantiates it for partial
correlation. The second is universal inference (Wasserman, Ramdas, & Balakrishnan,
2020): for a null model {Dθ : θ ∈ Θ0 } and any alternative fitted on past data, the
ratio of a sequentially-fitted alternative likelihood to the maximised null likelihood is
an e-process, with no regularity conditions on Θ0 beyond the existence of the supre-
mum. Section 5 instantiates it for causal direction. Universal inference is known to be
conservative (Tse & Davison, 2022), and Section 9.7 measures how conservative it is
here.



                                               5
2.2 Causal discovery setting
Let G ⋆ be a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with vertex set V = {1, . . . , d} identified
with random variables X1 , . . . , Xd , and let P be the joint law of X = (X1 , . . . , Xd ).
We write pa(i) for the parents of i in G ⋆ and de(i) for its descendants. Throughout,
observations o1 , o2 , . . . are drawn i.i.d. from P and arrive in batches; Ft is the σ -field
generated by the first t observations.

Assumption 1 (Markov condition) P is Markov to G ⋆ : whenever S d-separates i from j in
G ⋆ , Xi ⊥
         ⊥ Xj | XS under P .


    Assumption 1 is the direction of the correspondence that follows from the causal
structure itself: it says that the graph’s separations are reflected in the distribution.
Its converse—faithfulness, that every conditional independence in P corresponds to a
d-separation in G ⋆ —does not follow from the causal structure, and is the assumption
we do not make for validity.
    Write Sk (i, j ) = {S ⊆ V \ {i, j} : |S| ≤ k} for the family of admissible conditioning
sets. This family is determined by d and k and is fixed before any data are seen;
nothing about it adapts to the sample. We say the pair (i, j ) is separable within Sk
under P if Xi ⊥  ⊥ Xj | XS for some S ∈ Sk (i, j ).

Assumption 2 (Separator size) Every non-adjacent pair of G ⋆ has a d-separating set of size
at most k.


    Assumption 2 is structural rather than distributional: it constrains G ⋆ , not P , and
it can be guaranteed by choosing k large enough. It holds whenever k is at least the
maximum in-degree of G ⋆ , since for non-adjacent i, j either j ∈   / de(i), in which case
pa(i) d-separates them, or i ∈/ de(j ), in which case pa(j ) does. Taking k = d − 2 makes
it vacuous at the cost of an exponential family Sk ; the trade-off is computational, not
inferential, and we return to it in Section 6.3. Section 9.4 measures how often Assump-
tion 2 holds at the k we use, and compares it with how often δ -strong faithfulness
holds on the same instances.

2.3 Faithfulness and its quantitative strengthenings
Since the argument of this paper is about what faithfulness is doing, it is worth being
precise about the versions in play.
    Faithfulness holds if every conditional independence in P is implied by d-separation
in G ⋆ ; Meek (1995b) showed that it fails only on a Lebesgue-null set of parameters for a
fixed graph, which is the result usually cited in its defence and which Uhler et al. (2013)
showed to be misleading in finite samples. Adjacency-faithfulness (Ramsey, Spirtes, &
Zhang, 2006) is the weaker requirement that adjacent variables are dependent given
every conditioning set. δ-strong faithfulness (Kalisch & Bühlmann, 2007; Uhler et al.,
2013) is the quantitative strengthening that every partial correlation not forced to



                                              6
zero by d-separation has absolute value at least δ ; it is what turns consistency into a
finite-sample statement, and it is the premise of the comparators in Section 9.5.
    The asymmetry we exploit is this. Faithfulness in any of its forms is an assump-
tion about which dependences exist. A procedure that asserts an edge by rejecting an
independence null needs it only for power : without it, a genuinely adjacent pair whose
dependence is cancelled will fail to be certified, and the pair stays undecided. A pro-
cedure that asserts a non -edge by failing to reject needs it for validity : without it, a
cancelled dependence produces a confidently deleted edge. The same assumption sits
on opposite sides of the guarantee depending on which direction of the inference the
algorithm runs. J. Zhang and Spirtes (2008) and Ramsey et al. (2006) respond to this
by detecting or tolerating unfaithfulness within a delete-on-non-rejection architecture;
we respond by changing the architecture.

3 The certificate-only principle
We state the rule formally and record what it forces.

Definition 3 (Certificate) Let ϕ be a feature of G ⋆ —a proposition such as “i and j are
adjacent” or “G ⋆ contains the arrowhead i → j”. A certifying null for ϕ is a hypothesis Hϕ
with the property that P ∈ Hϕ whenever ϕ is false. A certificate for ϕ at level α is the event
that an e-process for Hϕ exceeds 1/α.


   The implication in Definition 3 runs one way only, and that is the whole point.
Hϕ must be true whenever ϕ is false; it may also be true in some cases where ϕ is
true, and then the certificate simply never fires. This asymmetry is what buys validity
without faithfulness, and what costs power.

Proposition 1 (Soundness of a single certificate) If (Et ) is an e-process for a certifying null
Hϕ , then P(∃t : ϕ is certified at level α and ϕ is false) ≤ α.



Proof If ϕ is false then P ∈ Hϕ by Definition 3, so (Et ) is an e-process under P and (1)
bounds the probability that it ever exceeds 1/α by α. If ϕ is true the event in question is
empty.                                                                                   □

   Proposition 1 is elementary; we state it to make explicit that the burden of
the design is entirely in constructing Hϕ , not in the inference. Three structural
consequences follow, and they shape everything below.

The algorithm cannot delete.
There is no certifying null for the proposition “i and j are non-adjacent”. Such a null
would have to be true whenever the pair is adjacent, that is, it would have to be a
dependence hypothesis rejected by evidence of independence; but evidence of indepen-
dence is exactly what a hypothesis test does not provide. Equivalence testing supplies
the nearest available substitute—one can reject “the partial correlation exceeds δ in


                                               7
absolute value”—but the resulting statement is “the association is smaller than δ ”,
which is a claim about effect size, not about absence. We return to this in Section 6.5.
In the absence of such a null, an algorithm obeying the rule must start from the empty
graph.

The output is three-valued.
Each pair is in exactly one of three states: certified adjacent (with or without a cer-
tified orientation), undecided, or—if the extension of Section 6.5 is enabled—certified
negligible at margin δ . The absence of an edge in the output graph is not an assertion.

Power is descriptive, not guaranteed.
Nothing in Proposition 1 promises that a true edge is ever certified. Whether it is
depends on adjacency-faithfulness, on the sample size, and on the primitive’s power.
This is a real limitation and we treat it as one: Section 9 reports certification rates
alongside error rates throughout, and reports the fraction of pairs left undecided rather
than suppressing it.

4 The adjacency certificate
4.1 The separability null
Fix a pair (i, j ) and consider
                    sep
                   Hij  :    ∃ S ∈ Sk (i, j ) such that Xi ⊥⊥ Xj | XS .                  (2)

                                    sep
Lemma 2 Under Assumptions 1 and 2, Hij  is a certifying null for the adjacency of i and j.



Proof Suppose i and j are non-adjacent in G ⋆ . By Assumption 2 there is a set S with |S| ≤ k
that d-separates them, and S ⊆ V \ {i, j}, so S ∈ Sk (i, j). By Assumption 1, Xi ⊥⊥ Xj | XS
                       sep
under P . Hence P ∈ Hij    .                                                               □

    Note what the lemma does not require. It says nothing about adjacent pairs. If i
                                                   sep
and j are adjacent, P may or may not lie in Hij        : an adjacent pair whose dependence
is exactly cancelled by a path through some S satisfies the null too, and then the
certificate cannot fire. That is the failure of adjacency-faithfulness, and it costs power,
not validity.

4.2 The minimum construction
       (S)
Let (Et )t≥0 be an e-process for the point null Xi ⊥
                                                   ⊥ Xj | XS , for each S ∈ Sk (i, j ),
all built from the same data stream. Define
                                                            (S)
                              At (i, j ) =     min        Et (i, j ).                    (3)
                                             S∈Sk (i,j)




                                                8
                                            sep
Proposition 3 (At )t≥0 is an e-process for Hij  .


               sep
Proof Let P ∈ Hij  . By (2) there exists S ⋆ ∈ Sk (i, j) with Xi ⊥
                                                                 ⊥ Xj | XS ⋆ under P , so P
                                      (S ⋆ )                                     (S ⋆ )
satisfies the point null for which (Et         ) is an e-process. By (3), At ≤ Et         pointwise for
                          ⋆
                        (S )
every t, hence Aτ ≤ Eτ         for every stopping time τ , and non-negativity gives EP [Aτ ] ≤
     (S ⋆ )
EP [Eτ ] ≤ 1.                                                                                □

     Combining Lemma 2, Proposition 3 and Proposition 1 gives the adjacency guar-
antee: the probability that At (i, j ) ever exceeds 1/α for a non-adjacent pair is at most
α.
     That a minimum of e-values is an e-value for a union null is standard (Vovk &
Wang, 2021), and the proof above is the standard one. What is specific here is the iden-
tification of adjacency as the complement of such a union, and the two consequences
that follow.

Remark 1 (No faithfulness) The proof uses only that (2) is true for non-adjacent pairs,
which follows from Assumptions 1 and 2. Faithfulness enters only through power: adjacency-
faithfulness (Ramsey et al., 2006) is what makes every E (S) grow for a genuinely adjacent
pair, and hence what makes the minimum grow. An instance where it fails leaves pairs
undecided rather than producing wrong edges. Stated exactly, validity requires three things:
the Markov condition, Assumption 2, and a valid per-set e-process. The third is not free. Our
default primitive (Section 4.3) is a linear-Gaussian safe test, so that model is assumed there;
substituting a nonparametric sequential test (He & Sutherland, 2026) removes it at a cost in
power. Proposition 3 is indifferent to which primitive is used, and Section 9.3 measures the
primitive’s calibration under six noise laws, including three outside its model.


Remark 2 (Multiplicity over pairs) The construction tests one hypothesis per pair, not one per
(pair, conditioning set) triple. A union bound over the adjacency family therefore runs over
 d                             d                                            4   4   4
 2 hypotheses rather than 2 · |Sk |. At d = 6 and k = 2 we have |Sk | = 0 + 1 + 2 = 11,
so the per-hypothesis level is 11 times larger than a triple-indexed budget would allow. The
saving grows with k: at d = 10, k = 3 it is 93. This is not a free lunch—the minimum in (3)
is itself conservative, since it discards all but the least favourable conditioning set—but the
conservatism is of a different kind from a multiplicity correction, and it is the kind that
vanishes as the least favourable set becomes uninformative.


4.3 The per-set primitive
Proposition 3 needs an e-process for each point null Xi ⊥   ⊥ Xj | XS . For linear-
Gaussian data we use an exact one, obtained as a Bayes factor with right-Haar priors
on the nuisance parameters. Write the hypothesis in regression form,

                      Xi = XS⊤ α + βXj + ε,                   ε ∼ N (0, σ 2 ),                     (4)

so that the null is β = 0 with nuisance parameters (α, σ ) shared between the hypothe-
ses. Place the right-Haar prior π (α, σ ) ∝ σ −1 on the nuisance block under both


                                                    9
hypotheses, and β | σ ∼ N (0, σ 2 g ) on the tested coefficient under the alternative, in the
manner of Zellner’s g -prior (Zellner, 1986). The right-Haar choice on the nuisance block
is the invariance-based prior of Jeffreys (1946) specialised to this group. Integrating
both marginal likelihoods in closed form (Appendix A) gives, after n observations,

                                        −(n−p)/2                                 G
        En = (1 + G)−1/2 1 − κ r̂n2                 ,    G = g Syy ,      κ =        ,       (5)
                                                                                 1+G

where p = |S| + 1; Sxx , Sxy , Syy are the cross-products of the XS -residualised versions
of Xj and Xi ; and r̂n2 = Sxy
                            2
                               /(Sxx Syy ) is the squared sample partial correlation.

Proposition 4 Under the linear-Gaussian model (4) with β = 0, the process (En ) of (5)
is a test martingale with respect to the filtration generated by the observations, and hence an
e-process.


    The proof (Appendix A) is the standard right-Haar argument (Berger et al., 1998;
Hendriksen et al., 2021): the null model is invariant under the group of location shifts
in the XS directions and scale changes, the right-Haar prior is relatively invariant
under that group, and the resulting Bayes factor is a ratio of marginal likelihoods
of the maximal invariant, whose null distribution is free of the nuisance parameters.
Bayes factors of this form are exactly the ones for which optional stopping is valid,
which is why not every Bayes factor would do here.
    Two properties of (5) drive the implementation.

Sufficiency.
E
Pn depends on the data          only through Schur complements of the running Gram matrix
                            ⊤
      (
  s≤n so  − ō )( o s − ō )  .  A single O(d2 ) sufficient statistic therefore serves the entire
hypothesis family {(i, j, S )} simultaneously: no per-hypothesis state is stored, and the
cost of an update is O(d2 ) regardless of how many hypotheses are live. This is what
makes it feasible to keep every pair’s minimum in (3) current after every batch.

The prior scale must be fixed in advance.
g enters through G = gSyy , and Syy grows with n. A prior scale chosen to adapt to the
running sample size—for instance by rescaling g so that G stays constant—destroys
the martingale property, because the “prior” would then depend on the data it is being
used to weigh. We fix g from a warm-up prefix of the stream that is excluded from
every e-process, using it only to set standardisation constants. The warm-up length
appears in the experiments as a tuning parameter and nowhere in the guarantee.

Remark 3 (Calibration was verified, not assumed) Proposition 4 is a theorem, but the imple-
mentation of a theorem can be wrong, and a miscalibrated primitive would invalidate every
downstream claim while leaving all the proofs intact. We therefore verified calibration by sim-
ulation: monitoring (5) after every observation over 3000 replications and 1500 time points
under a true null gave realised crossing rates of 0.149, 0.076, 0.041 and 0.008 against nominal
α ∈ {0.20, 0.10, 0.05, 0.01}. Section 9.3 repeats the exercise under six noise laws.


                                               10
4.4 Confidence sequence by inversion
Because (5) is available in closed form for every value of the tested coefficient, it
can be inverted to give a confidence sequence—a sequence of intervals covering β
simultaneously at all times with probability 1 − α (Howard, Ramdas, McAuliffe, &
Sekhon, 2021). Writing β̂ = Sxy /Syy for the least-squares estimate of the coefficient
of Xj in the residualised regression, the level-(1 − α) confidence sequence is
                   s                                "
                                    2
                                                              2/(n−p) #
                       τ Sxx Syy − Sxy
                                                        
              1                                   1         α
        β̂ ±                             ,    τ =     1− √                ,           (6)
             Syy            1−τ                   κ        1+G

valid whenever τ > 0, and the whole line otherwise. The derivation is in Appendix B.
We report it because it is the natural summary of evidence about an edge’s strength,
because it is what the equivalence-testing extension of Section 6.5 uses, and because
it provides an independent check on the implementation: (6) must agree with a brute-
force inversion of (5), and an early version of our code did not. The discrepancy was
a sign error in the log(1 + G) term, which produced intervals roughly half the correct
width—a defect invisible in any Type-I error simulation of the test itself, since the test
was correct and only the reported interval was wrong. Agreement between the closed
form and a numerical inversion is now a unit test.

4.5 Beyond the linear-Gaussian primitive
Conditional independence testing is hard in general: Shah and Peters (2020) show
that no test can have non-trivial power against all alternatives while controlling size
over all null distributions with continuous conditional laws. Every usable primitive
therefore buys power with a model. The two mainstream routes are the Model-X
framework (Candès, Fan, Janson, & Lv, 2018), which assumes the conditional law
of Xi given XS is known, and parametric or kernel-based assumptions on the joint
law. Sequential conditional-independence tests to date have largely taken the Model-X
route; Csillag, Struchiner, and Goedert (2025) note that the requirement is typically
inaccessible in a discovery setting, where the conditional laws are precisely what is
unknown. Construction (5) avoids it by assuming linearity and Gaussianity instead,
which is a strong assumption but a checkable one. Section 9.11 reports what happens
when it fails.

5 The direction certificate
5.1 Why a direction can be a null hypothesis
Within a Markov equivalence class no observational statistic distinguishes the member
DAGs, so “the direction is j → i” is not a testable proposition there: both directions
have the same likelihood under every distribution. The statement becomes testable
exactly when a functional restriction breaks the symmetry, and the classical such
restriction is linear non-Gaussianity.



                                             11
Proposition 5 (Shimizu et al., 2006, after Darmois, 1953 and Comon, 1994) Let Xi =
βXj + ei with Xj ⊥ ⊥ ei , E[ei ] = 0 and β ̸= 0. If at most one of Xj , ei is Gaussian, there is
no δ, ej with Xj = δXi + ej and Xi ⊥  ⊥ ej . If both are Gaussian, such a representation always
exists.


    Proposition 5 is the identifiability statement that LiNGAM rests on, and it says
two things we use in opposite ways. Under non-Gaussianity, exactly one of the two
factorisations of the pair is compatible with the model, so the wrong one is a genuine,
false, testable hypothesis. Under Gaussianity, both are compatible, so no evidence can
separate them and any method that reports a direction anyway is reporting an artefact
of its tie-breaking rule. Our construction inherits both halves.
    DirectLiNGAM (Shimizu et al., 2011) and the pairwise measures of Hyvärinen and
Smith (2013) exploit the first half by comparing the two directions’ scores and taking
the larger. Shimizu and Kano (2008) take a step towards inference by testing non-
normality-based direction hypotheses in a structural equation modelling framework,
and Komatsu, Shimizu, and Shimodaira (2010) assess LiNGAM’s reliability by multi-
scale bootstrap. What we add is a sequential e-process, which converts the comparison
into a family-wise, time-uniform error statement over a whole graph.

5.2 The direction null and its e-process
Fix an ordered pair (i, j ) whose adjacency has been certified, and a conditioning block
Z (Section 5.5 explains how Z is chosen and why it is then frozen). The two competing
factorisations of (Xi , Xj ) given Z are

                  Dj→i :        Xj = a⊤ Z + u,         Xi = βXj + γ ⊤ Z + e,                (7)
                      i→j               ⊤                                 ⊤
                  D         :   Xi = b Z + v,          Xj = δXi + η Z + w,                  (8)

with u ⊥⊥ Z , e ⊥⊥ (Xj , Z ) and correspondingly for the second. Both are conditional
densities of the pair (Xi , Xj ) given Z , so the marginal law of Z is a common factor
and cancels from any ratio; this is why we may work with the conditional likelihoods
and never model Z .
   The certifying null for the arrowhead i → j is
  dir
 Hj→i :     the pair was generated by the j → i factorisation = {Dθj→i : θ ∈ Θ}, (9)

                                                                                       dir
where θ = (a, β, γ, noise parameters). Under Proposition 5 and non-Gaussianity, Hj→i
is true whenever the arrowhead i → j is absent, so it is a certifying null in the sense
of Definition 3.
    We test it by sequential universal inference (Wasserman et al., 2020). Let θ̂s−1 be
any estimator of the alternative’s parameters computed from o1 , . . . , os−1 , and set
                                X                              X
                  log Et =            log Dθ̂i→j (os ) − sup         log Dθj→i (os ).      (10)
                                            s−1
                                                        θ∈Θ
                                s≤t                            s≤t




                                                  12
                                                               dir
Proposition 6 (Et )t≥0 defined by (10) is an e-process for Hj→i     , provided the supremum in
the second term is attained (or exceeded) by the fitting procedure.



Proof Let P = Dθj→i
                 ⋆
                       dir
                    ∈ Hj→i and define
                                               i→j
                                      Y Dθ̂s−1 (os )
                              Mt =         j→i
                                                        ,      M0 = 1.
                                      s≤t Dθ ⋆ (os )

Since θ̂s−1 is Fs−1 -measurable and Di→j (·) is a probability density for each fixed value of
                                           θ̂s−1
θ̂s−1 ,
                              Di→j (os )
                                                  
                                                        Z
                           θ̂s−1
                      EP  j→i              Fs−1  =        Di→j (o) do ≤ 1,
                          Dθ⋆ (os )                          θ̂s−1

so (Mt ) is a non-negative supermartingale (a martingale when the densities are mutually
absolutely continuous) with M0 = 1. The subtracted term in (10) is a supremum over Θ and
θ⋆ ∈ Θ, so it is at least s≤t log Dθj→i
                           P
                                       ⋆  (os ), giving Et ≤ Mt pointwise. Optional stopping
yields EP [Eτ ] ≤ EP [Mτ ] ≤ 1 for every stopping time τ .                                 □

    The argument is the standard universal-inference one, and it is worth being clear
that its strength is also its cost. It requires no regularity conditions on Θ, no asymp-
totics, and no correctly specified alternative—the numerator may be fitted however
one likes, since it only needs to integrate to one. In exchange, subtracting a maximised
likelihood rather than an integrated one makes the resulting e-process conservative,
typically by a factor related to the null model’s dimension (Tse & Davison, 2022).
Section 9.7 measures this: the certificate orients 88% of the edges DirectLiNGAM
orients, which is the price of attaching an error statement to the answer.

5.3 Fitting the null, and the requirement that the supremum
    be real
We fit both factorisations with generalised Gaussian (exponential power) noise,

                                   κ        n r κo
                fσ,κ (r) =               exp −     ,                 σ > 0, κ > 0,       (11)
                               2σ Γ(1/κ)       σ

a family (Box & Tiao, 1973; Subbotin, 1923) whose shape parameter spans Laplace
(κ = 1), Gaussian (κ = 2) and, as κ → ∞, the uniform limit. Given κ, the coefficients
are fitted by iteratively reweighted least squares on the |r|κ loss and σ is profiled out
in closed form; κ is then chosen to maximise the profile likelihood.
    Proposition 6 makes a demand on this last step that is easy to overlook, and we
state it as a remark because we violated it.

Remark 4 (The supremum must be attained) The inequality Et ≤ Mt in the proof holds
because the subtracted term is at least the log-likelihood at θ⋆ . If the fitting procedure
maximises over a strict subset of Θ that excludes θ⋆ , the subtracted term can fall below


                                                   13
the log-likelihood at θ⋆ , Et can exceed Mt , and the e-process property fails—silently, since
nothing in the output signals it.
    Our first implementation profiled κ over the fixed grid {0.7, 0.9, 1.2, 1.5, 2.0, 3.0, 5.0},
which omits κ = 1. On a correctly specified Laplace null, the fitted “supremum” fell below
the likelihood at the true parameter in 32 of 200 replications, with a worst shortfall of 2.397
nats—an inflation of Et by a factor of up to 11, and hence a certificate issued at a true level
of up to 11α. The fix is to treat the grid as a bracketing device only and refine κ continuously
by bounded scalar optimisation of the profile likelihood; the same check then gives 0 of 200
violations and zero shortfall. We report this because the defect is generic to universal infer-
ence with a discretised nuisance search, because it is invisible to a Type-I error simulation
run at the same grid (the grid is wrong for the truth, not for itself), and because the correct
check is cheap: simulate under the null at a known θ⋆ and verify that the fitted supremum
never falls below the likelihood there.


5.4 Abstention under Gaussianity
Proposition 7 Suppose (Xi , Xj ) given Z is jointly Gaussian. Then the null and alternative
models in (10) have identical maximised likelihoods, and log Et ≤ 0 for every t.



Proof Under joint Gaussianity both (7) and (8) parameterise the same set of joint condi-
tionalPdensities—the bivariate Gaussians with mean P
                                                   linear in Z—by Proposition 5. Hence
supθ s log Dθj→i (os ) = supθ s log Dθi→j (os ) ≥             i→j
                               P
                                                      s log D     (os ), the last inequality
                                                                 θ̂s−1
because a sequentially fitted parameter cannot beat the maximised one on the same data.
Substituting into (10) gives log Et ≤ 0.                                             □

    The procedure therefore abstains exactly where the direction is not identified, and
it does so as a consequence of the construction rather than because a Gaussianity pre-
test told it to. This matters practically: a pre-test would itself have a Type-II error,
and a method that orients whenever the pre-test fails to reject Gaussianity is once
again asserting on non-rejection. Ding and Zhang (2025) give the underlying equiv-
alence in a usable form—Gaussianity of the forward model’s noise is equivalent to
independence between regressor and residual in the reverse regression—and use it to
avoid an explicit Gaussianity test in a different way. Section 9.7 shows the absten-
tion empirically: under Gaussian noise the certificate orients 0 of 692 edges over 200
replications, while DirectLiNGAM orients all 692 and gets 356 of them wrong.

5.5 Freezing the conditioning block
The block Z in (7)–(8) is chosen when a pair’s adjacency is certified: it is the set of
that pair’s already-certified neighbours at that moment. The direction process for the
pair then begins accumulating, and Z is never changed.
    Freezing is not a convenience. A conditioning block that kept changing would
change the hypothesis under test, and Ville’s inequality bounds the crossing proba-
bility for a fixed null. There is a second, subtler issue: Z is chosen using the data,
since it depends on which adjacencies have been certified. The resulting guarantee is
therefore conditional on the σ -field FT at the (stopping) time T at which the pair’s


                                              14
adjacency is certified. Because the direction process uses only observations after T ,
and these are independent of FT given the model, the supermartingale argument in
Proposition 6 goes through conditionally on FT , and the unconditional bound follows
by taking expectations. We make this precise in Appendix C. The consequence for the
implementation is that the direction process must discard every observation before T ,
which costs power at pairs certified late.

Remark 5 (An implementation constraint that was a bug first) The observations scored
by the numerator of (10) and those entering the denominator’s maximised likelihood must
be the same index set. A denominator ranging over additional observations subtracts their
log-density with no matching numerator term, which adds to log Et a quantity of order
the number of extra observations. In our testing this certified both directions of every pair,
including under Gaussian noise, where Proposition 7 guarantees the opposite. The symptom
is diagnostic: whenever a direction procedure certifies both directions of a pair, the index sets
are misaligned.


Remark 6 (Misspecification is the main theoretical risk) Proposition 6 needs the denomina-
tor’s supremum to dominate the likelihood at the true null parameter. When the noise lies
outside the fitted family (11), the supremum is taken over a model that does not contain
the truth and no such domination is guaranteed. This is the certificate’s principal theoretical
gap, and unlike Remark 4 it cannot be closed by better optimisation.
    Empirically the certificate is more robust than that suggests. Against noise laws breaking
each property of the family in turn—Student-t3 (polynomial rather than exponential tails),
shifted exponential (asymmetric) and a two-component mixture (bimodal)—the reversed
direction was certified in 0 of 12 runs in each case at α = 0.05, with full power retained. But
0 of 12 is a weak bound, the study is bivariate, and Section 9.10 shows what happens on real
data where the linear model itself is wrong: the certificate is confidently and systematically
inverted. We regard bounding the misspecification gap analytically as the most important
open problem the construction raises.


6 CERT-CD
6.1 The algorithm
CERT-CD maintains a three-valued status for every unordered pair and a two-valued
status for every ordered pair. It streams data in batches. After each batch it updates
the running Gram matrix, recomputes At (i, j ) for every undecided pair, and certifies
adjacency when the running maximum of At (i, j ) crosses the pair’s threshold. At
that moment the pair’s conditioning block is frozen and its two direction processes
are opened. Certified arrowheads are added when a direction process crosses its own
threshold.
    Budgets are fixed before any data  arrive. The total budget splits as α = αA + αD ;
αA is divided evenly over the d2 adjacency nulls and αD evenly over the d(d − 1)
                                   




                                               15
Algorithm 1 CERT-CD
Require: stream o1 , o2 , . . . ; budget α; order k ; warm-up m
 1: αA , αD ← split of α; λA , λD as in (12)
 2: consume o1 , . . . , om to fix standardisation constants and the prior scale g ; discard
    them
 3: status(i, j ) ← Undecided for all pairs; arrow(i, j ) ← false for all ordered pairs
 4: Ā(i, j ) ← 0; Ē (i, j ) ← 0                                          ▷ running maxima
 5: for each batch B do
 6:     update the running Gram matrix with B
 7:     for all pairs (i, j ) with status(i, j ) = Undecided do
 8:           A ← minS∈Sk (i,j) E (S) (i, j )         ▷ Schur complements of the Gram matrix
 9:           Ā(i, j ) ← max{Ā(i, j ), A}
10:           if Ā(i, j ) ≥ λA then
11:                status(i, j ) ← CertifiedEdge
12:                Zij ← { ℓ : status(i, ℓ) or status(j, ℓ) = CertifiedEdge }        ▷ frozen
13:                open direction processes for (i, j ) and (j, i), starting from the next
    observation
14:           end if
15:     end for
16:     for all open ordered pairs (i, j ) do
17:           update log E (i, j ) by (10) on the observations since the pair was opened
18:           Ē (i, j ) ← max{Ē (i, j ), E (i, j )}
19:           if Ē (i, j ) ≥ λD then arrow(i, j ) ← true
20:           end if
21:     end for
22:     output the three-valued graph; the analyst may stop here
23: end for



direction nulls, so the thresholds are
                                      d
                                          
                                      2                  d(d − 1)
                              λA =            ,   λD =            .                       (12)
                                     αA                    αD

Nothing about the split adapts to the data. Which certificates the algorithm happens
to evaluate—it only opens direction processes for certified pairs—does not enter the
bound, so the graph-dependent order in which pairs are examined is free.
    The output graph contains only certified edges. An edge carries an arrowhead at an
end where a direction certificate has fired and a circle otherwise, in the mark notation
of Richardson and Spirtes (2002). The absence of an edge means undecided,
not certified absent.

6.2 The whole-graph guarantee
Theorem 8 (Whole-graph anytime validity) Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, the per-set
processes E (S) are e-processes for their point nulls, and—for the direction certificates only—
the pairs are generated by the linear non-Gaussian model of Section 5 with the supremum


                                                  16
in (10) attained. Then
                                                                       
                    ∃ t ≥ 0 : some edge certified by time t is absent
            P         ⋆                                                   ≤ α.                (13)
                from G , or some arrowhead certified by time t is wrong
In particular, for any stopping time τ —including one chosen by inspecting the output—the
graph reported at time τ satisfies P(it contains a false certified edge or arrowhead) ≤ α.



Proof Index the adjacency nulls by pairs and the direction nulls by ordered pairs; both
families are determined by d and k and are fixed before any observation. Consider a single
                                                                                           sep
adjacency null for a pair (i, j) that is non-adjacent in G ⋆ . By Lemma 2, P ∈ Hij             ; by
Proposition 3, (At (i, j)) is an e-process for that null; so by (1) the probability that At (i, j)
ever reaches λA = d2 /αA is at most αA / d2 . Since the algorithm certifies the edge exactly
                                                

on that event, the probability that this pair is ever falsely certified is at most αA / d2 .
                                                                                          

     Similarly, consider an ordered pair (i, j) for which the arrowhead i → j is absent from G ⋆ .
               dir
Then P ∈ Hj→i      , which by Proposition 6 (applied conditionally on FT , see Appendix C) has
(Et (i, j)) as an e-process, and the probability that it ever reaches λD is at most αD /(d(d−1)).
     The event in (13) is the union, over the at most d2 non-adjacent pairs and at most d(d−1)
                                                         

absent arrowheads, of these events. A union bound gives d2 ·αA / d2 +d(d−1)·αD /(d(d−1)) =
                                                                      

αA + αD = α.
     The final statement follows because the event in (13) contains, for every stopping time
τ , the event that the graph at time τ contains a false certified assertion; the bound is time-
uniform, so no separate argument per stopping time is needed.                                     □

    We stress the form of the quantifier. The theorem does not say “for each fixed τ ,
the error at τ is at most α”, which would be a family of pointwise statements requiring
a further union bound to combine. It says that the probability of the trajectory ever
containing a false certified assertion is at most α, and every stopping-time statement
is a consequence. This is the difference between a fixed-sample guarantee applied
repeatedly and a time-uniform one, and Section 9.2 measures how large that difference
is in practice.

Remark 7 (What the theorem does not cover) Theorem 8 bounds the probability of a false
assertion. It says nothing about the pairs left undecided, and it does not bound the proba-
bility that a true edge is missed—there is no such bound, and there cannot be one without
a faithfulness-type assumption. It also does not cover the analyst’s use of the output for
anything else: an intervention chosen on the basis of a certified arrowhead inherits the α,
but a downstream effect estimate computed from the certified graph does not automatically
inherit anything, and would need its own analysis; the estimand there is the intervention-
effect problem of Maathuis, Kalisch, and Bühlmann (2009), and combining a certified graph
with a valid effect interval is a genuinely open question.


6.3 Complexity
Per batch, the Gram-matrix update is O(d2 ) per observation. Recomputing At (i, j )
                              3
for
P a pair
       d−2
           costs Ok(|Sk | · k ), dominated by the Schur complements, and |Sk | =
   r≤k  r    = O ( d ). Summed    over pairs, an update of the whole adjacency layer is


                                                17
O(dk+2 k 3 ), with no dependence on n: all the data enter through the sufficient statistic.
Only undecided pairs are updated, so the cost falls as the run proceeds.
    The direction layer is the expensive part. Each open ordered pair requires a
generalised-Gaussian fit at every batch, which is an IRLS loop plus a scalar optimisa-
tion over κ, and it does not reduce to a sufficient statistic because the fit is nonlinear
in the residuals. The cost is O(d2 · nbatch · |Z| · iterations) per batch, and it is the rea-
son our experiments stop at d = 11. This is an implementation limit, not a limit of
the construction: the numerator’s parameters may be refitted at any frequency (refit-
ting less often only costs power, since the numerator needs to be Fs−1 -measurable and
nothing more), and the denominator’s maximised likelihood admits warm starts across
batches. We have not pursued either optimisation and regard scaling as unproven; see
Section 10.

6.4 On the multiplicity layer
Theorem 8 uses a union bound over a fixed family, and a union bound is the least pow-
erful admissible way to combine evidence. It is reasonable to ask why we do not use
a sharper procedure. E-value-based family-wise error control has advanced consider-
ably: Hartog and Lei (2026) show that e-closed testing with weighted arithmetic-mean
local tests strictly dominates e-Bonferroni, and their e-Holm procedure achieves this
at O(m log m) cost. Crucially, the arithmetic-mean local test is valid under arbitrary
dependence between the base e-values, so the fact that all our per-hypothesis processes
are functions of the same running Gram matrix is not an obstacle. An earlier draft of
this paper claimed it was; that claim was wrong, and we correct it here.
    The actual obstruction is different and, we think, more interesting. Our certificates
fire on the running maximum Āt = sups≤t As of an e-process, because that is what
a monitored run rejects on. A running maximum is not an e-value. Ville’s inequality
bounds P(Ā∞ ≥ 1/α) by α, which makes Āt what Hartog and Lei (2026) call a
pseudo e-value, but E[Āτ ] generally exceeds one, and closed testing takes e-values as
inputs, not pseudo e-values. Feeding running maxima into an e-closed procedure is not
licensed by the theory. Hartog and Lei (2026) address this case directly and recover a
bound of α + O(α2 log α−1 ) for pseudo e-values, but only under independence across
hypotheses—and that is where our shared sufficient statistic does bite.
    So the situation is: dependence is fine for e-closed testing with e-values; running
maxima are fine under independence; we have running maxima under dependence, and
no result covers the combination. The union bound over Ville events is what remains
available, and it is exact for what it does. Closing this gap—a family-wise procedure for
dependent pseudo e-values that improves on Bonferroni—would immediately improve
the power of every method in this paper, and we regard it as the most valuable piece
of the surrounding theory that is missing.
    Two weaker improvements are available now and we note     P them. First, the budget
split need not be uniform: any fixed weights wh > 0 with h wh = 1 give thresholds
1/(αwh ) and the same bound, so prior knowledge about which pairs are likely adja-
cent can be spent as unequal weights, decided before the data arrive. Second, if the
analyst wants false-discovery-rate rather than family-wise control, the e-BH procedure
of Wang and Ramdas (2022) applies to e-values under arbitrary dependence, as do


                                             18
the martingale-based merging rules of Vovk and Wang (2024), and would replace the
union bound directly—but only at a fixed stopping time, since it again takes e-values
rather than running maxima as inputs.

6.5 An optional fourth verdict: certified negligible
Section 3 argued that there is no certifying null for non-adjacency. There is, however,
one for a weaker proposition, and analysts who need it can have it at the cost of a
stated margin. Fix δ > 0 and consider the interval null
                                   big
                                  Hij,S :    |ρij·S | ≥ δ,                             (14)

where ρij·S is the partial correlation. Rejecting it for every S in a chosen set certifies
that the pair’s association is smaller than δ given each of those conditioning sets—a
statement about effect size, not about the graph. The confidence sequence (6) supplies
the test directly: reject when the interval excludes [−δ, δ ]. The resulting verdict, cer-
tified negligible at margin δ , is honest in a way that a deleted edge is not, because δ is
reported alongside it and the reader can judge whether an association below δ mat-
ters for their purpose. It is also strictly less than the claim a delete-on-non-rejection
method makes, which is presumably why that claim is popular. We implement this
verdict but do not use it in the experiments below, since the comparisons there are
with methods that assert absence outright.

7 Latent confounders
The adjacency certificate does not require causal sufficiency; nothing in Lemma 2
assumes that all common causes are observed. What changes under latent confounding
is the interpretation of a certified edge and the availability of the direction certificate.
    If G ⋆ is a DAG over observed and latent variables and we observe only V , the rele-
vant object is the maximal ancestral graph over V (Richardson & Spirtes, 2002), and
the relevant separation notion is m-separation. Assumption 2 becomes the require-
ment that every non-adjacent pair in the MAG has an m-separating set of size at
most k among the observed variables—which, unlike the DAG case, is not guaranteed
by bounding an in-degree, and is why FCI searches Possible-D-SEP sets rather than
neighbourhoods. With that caveat, Lemma 2 and Proposition 3 go through verbatim
with d-separation replaced by m-separation, and a certified edge means “i and j are
adjacent in the MAG”, that is, neither is separable from the other by any observed
set—which is compatible with a direct effect, a latent common cause, or both.
    We therefore implement CERT-FCI: run the adjacency certificates to obtain a
certified skeleton, apply the FCI orientation rules R1–R4 (originally Spirtes et al.,
1995, in the formulation of J. Zhang, 2008) to the certified edges only, and report the
resulting partial ancestral graph. Orientations produced by the FCI rules inherit the
adjacency certificates’ guarantee only in the weak sense that they are sound given a
correct skeleton and correct sepsets; we do not claim a family-wise bound for them,
and we flag this as the principal gap in the latent-variable extension. The direction



                                            19
certificate of Section 5 is unavailable here, because Proposition 5 assumes no unob-
served common cause of the pair. Section 9.8 reports what CERT-FCI recovers, and
Section 9.11 reports what latent confounding does to the direction certificate when it
is applied anyway.

8 Related work
Most of the primitives used in this paper are standard, and the value of the contri-
bution depends on saying precisely which. We therefore separate the accounting into
what is not new, what we believe is new, and—because we think this is the more use-
ful disclosure—three claims of novelty we made in earlier drafts and withdrew after
reading the prior art.

8.1 What is not new
The minimum of e-values.
That mink E (k) is an e-value for a union null is standard (Vovk & Wang, 2021), and
Proposition 3 is that fact applied to a particular union.

Edge-level aggregation over conditioning sets.
PC-p (Strobl et al., 2019) upper-bounds an edge’s p-value by the maximum p-value
over conditioning sets—the exact p-value analogue of (3)—and controls the false
discovery rate of the resulting edge decisions with Benjamini–Yekutieli (Benjamini
& Yekutieli, 2001). Treating adjacency rather than conditional independence as the
object being tested is also the premise of DAT (Amin & Wilson, 2024), which replaces
the exponential family of tests with a relaxed optimisation problem solved by neural
networks.

One-sided, faithfulness-free false-edge control.
This is exactly Theorem 2 of ϵ-CUT (Shaska & Mitra, 2025), reached by the same
reasoning we use: a guarantee against false edges needs a correct null, not faithfulness.
We had believed this was ours; it is not.

Abstention and three-valued output.
FCI leaves unidentifiable edges undirected; the conservative PC of Ramsey et al. (2006)
marks ambiguous triples rather than resolving them; Uehara (2026) attaches per-edge
resolved/impossible codes with tiers that abstain when a precondition test rejects;
and Prakash, Xia, and Erosheva (2024) give a bivariate direction test with an explicit
inconclusive outcome.

Sequential e-values inside a constraint-based algorithm.
Csillag et al. (2025) already do this, calibrating batched Fisher-z p-values into per-test
e-values within PC.




                                           20
Residual-based direction criteria.
DirectLiNGAM (Shimizu et al., 2011) and the pairwise likelihood ratios of Hyvärinen
and Smith (2013) use exactly the comparison in (10)’s two branches, and Ruiz,
Madrid Padilla, and Zhou (2022) learn a topological ordering from likelihood-
ratio scores on residuals. The entropy-based approximations underlying the pairwise
measures go back to Hyvärinen (1998).

Orientation error control per se.
Strobl et al. (2019) control the FDR of orientations, using the rule set of Meek (1995a);
Shimizu and Kano (2008) test direction of causation using non-normality; Komatsu
et al. (2010) attach bootstrap reliability to LiNGAM outputs; Strieder and Drton
(2023) give confidence statements under structure uncertainty for equal-variance mod-
els. None of these is a time-uniform family-wise statement, but the general project
of attaching error control to orientation decisions is well established, and it would be
wrong to present it as new.

8.2 Three withdrawn claims
We record these because the accounting above is only credible if the failures are visible
too.
1. “Orientation error is uncontrolled in the literature.” False. PC-p (Strobl et al.,
   2019) controls the FDR of unshielded-collider and Meek-rule orientations, and
   Shimizu and Kano (2008)—published in this journal’s subject area two decades
   ago—tests direction of causation directly.
2. “Faithfulness-free finite-sample false-edge control is new.” False. It is Theorem 2
   of Shaska and Mitra (2025), at each fixed n.
3. “Sequential anytime-valid e-values have not been used inside constraint-based
   discovery.” False; see Csillag et al. (2025).

8.3 What we believe is new
Three claims survive that accounting. We state each in the narrowest form we can
defend.

(i) Orientation error control that is simultaneously finite-sample,
time-uniform, family-wise over a graph, and not confined to the Markov
equivalence class.
Each of these four properties has precedent separately. Strobl et al. (2019) is finite-
sample and family-wise (in the FDR sense) but confined to the equivalence class, so
an edge in no v-structure is unorientable by it in principle. Shimizu and Kano (2008)
escapes the class and is a genuine test, but is bivariate and fixed-sample. Ruiz et
al. (2022) is closest in statistic—likelihood-ratio scores on residuals—but proves only
population-level identifiability, requires all noise terms to come from a single scale-
location family, and its “sequential” refers to greedy sorting rather than to sequential
inference. Strieder and Drton (2023) is finite-sample and escapes the class but assumes


                                           21
   Table 1 Positioning against the closest prior work. “Beyond MEC” means the method can
   orient an edge lying in no v-structure. “Time-uniform” means the error statement holds
   simultaneously at all sample sizes. “Faithfulness-free” refers to the validity of the method’s
   assertions, not to its power.

                                               error control on       beyond     time-     faithf.-
   method                                  adjacency    orientation    MEC      uniform     free
   PC (Spirtes et al., 2000)                   –             –          no        no        no
   PC-p (Strobl et al., 2019)                FDR           FDR          no        no        no
   ϵ-CUT (Shaska & Mitra, 2025)            one-sided         –          no        no        yes
   DAT (Amin & Wilson, 2024)                   –             –          no        no        no
   PPE-PC (Csillag et al., 2025)            per-test         –          no        yes       no
   DirectLiNGAM (Shimizu et al., 2011)         –             –          yes       no        n/a
   Shimizu and Kano (2008)                     –           test         yes       no        n/a
   Ruiz et al. (2022)                          –             –          yes       no        n/a
   Strieder and Drton (2023)                   –         conf. set      yes       no        n/a
   Uehara (2026)                          provenance    provenance      no        no        no
   CERT-CD (this paper)                     FWER          FWER          yes       yes        yes




equal error variances and targets causal effects rather than arrowheads. Uehara (2026)
certifies provenance —which theorem licensed a direction—rather than error, and its
Theorem 1 bounds expert query counts under an ideal-oracle assumption. We are not
aware of a predecessor combining all four properties.

(ii) A whole-graph guarantee proved rather than assumed.
Per-test anytime-validity in discovery is not new (Csillag et al., 2025), but graph-
level validity there is obtained by assumption: their Assumption 2.5 states that the
downstream algorithm is valid whenever its inputs are, and they note the multiple-
comparison concern without resolving it. Theorem 8 proves the statement over a fixed
family and extends it to orientations. The proof is not deep—it is a union bound over
Ville events—but the statement is the one a practitioner needs and it was previously
an assumption.

(iii) Time-uniformity on the adjacency side.
ϵ-CUT (Shaska & Mitra, 2025) holds the same one-sided, faithfulness-free ground
at each fixed n. Bounding the probability that a false edge is ever certified over a
monitored run is a different statement, and it is the one a monitored run needs;
Section 9.2 measures the size of the gap. Secondarily, minimising over the complete
family Sk performs all the tests that PC-p’s maximum-p bound requires, so PC-p’s
zero-Type-II-error assumption is not needed here.

8.4 Other neighbouring literatures
Score-based and permutation-based discovery.
GES (Chickering, 2002) and greedy permutation methods (Solus, Wang, & Uhler,
2021) search over equivalence classes or orderings with consistency guarantees; they
do not attach finite-sample error statements to individual features, and the certificate-
only rule has no direct analogue there, since a score comparison is not a test.


                                                22
Functional causal models beyond LiNGAM.
Additive noise models (Hoyer, Janzing, Mooij, Peters, & Schölkopf, 2009), post-
nonlinear models (K. Zhang & Hyvärinen, 2009), causal additive models (Bühlmann,
Peters, & Ernest, 2014) and equal-variance Gaussian models (Peters & Bühlmann,
2014) all break the equivalence class by restricting the functional form. Any of them
could in principle replace the generalised-Gaussian likelihoods in (10), provided the
resulting null model admits a computable supremum; this is the most direct route to
relaxing Remark 6.

Invariance-based methods.
Invariant causal prediction (Peters, Bühlmann, & Meinshausen, 2016) identifies a set
of causal parents by intersecting the environments in which a candidate set is invari-
ant, and controls the probability that the returned set is not a subset of the true
parents. The logic is close to ours in spirit—it asserts by rejecting non-invariance,
and returns the empty set rather than guessing—and it is the one established method
whose guarantee has the same one-sided shape. Section 9.9 reports an anytime-valid
variant of it built on the same primitives.

Terminology.
“Anytime FCI” (Spirtes, 2001) denotes a computational property: the outer loop over
conditioning-set sizes may be interrupted and the algorithm still returns a sound graph.
“Anytime-valid” in this paper is an inferential property: time-uniform error control
at data-dependent stopping times. The two notions are unrelated, and the collision of
names is unfortunate.

9 Experiments
9.1 Protocol
Every experiment streams data in batches and inspects the estimate after every batch,
scoring the worst case over the whole trajectory rather than the state at a single sample
size. This is deliberate: a time-uniform guarantee is a claim about trajectories, and
evaluating it at a single n would measure something else. Where a comparator has
only a fixed-sample guarantee we report both its trajectory-worst behaviour (which is
what an analyst monitoring it would experience) and its behaviour at the final sample
size (which is what its guarantee covers), because reporting only the first would be
unfair and reporting only the second would miss the point.
    Random DAGs are drawn with independent edge probabilities in a random topo-
logical order, with coefficients uniform on ±[0.5, 1.2]. Noise is Laplace unless stated.
Binomial proportions carry Wilson 95% intervals. Code, seeds and figures are avail-
able in the repository (Section 11); every number below is reproduced by a script in
experiments/.
    Two comparators recur. PC is the standard algorithm with a Fisher-z test, re-run
from scratch at each sample size on the same stream. SPRINT-CD is an anytime-
valid PC variant we also implemented, which deletes an edge when a confidence


                                           23
        Table 2 Probability of ever rejecting a true null over a monitored run (2000
        replications, n ≤ 1000), with Wilson 95% intervals. “Fisher-z, monitored”
        inspects after every observation; “Fisher-z, once” evaluates only at n = 1000.

        nominal α    Fisher-z, monitored        Fisher-z, once      e-process (monitored)
        0.01         0.100 [0.088, 0.114]    0.010 [0.006, 0.015]    0.007 [0.004, 0.012]
        0.05         0.346 [0.325, 0.367]    0.056 [0.046, 0.066]    0.024 [0.018, 0.031]
        0.10         0.565 [0.543, 0.586]    0.103 [0.090, 0.117]    0.049 [0.040, 0.059]
        0.20         0.816 [0.798, 0.832]    0.193 [0.176, 0.211]    0.091 [0.079, 0.104]




sequence for the partial correlation falls entirely inside a region of practical equiva-
lence; it is unpublished and is included here as the strongest available representative of
delete-on-non-rejection with sequential machinery, so that the comparison isolates the
deletion rule rather than the fixed-sample/sequential distinction. Both decide absence
by failing to find evidence of presence; that is the property under test.

9.2 What monitoring costs a fixed-sample test
Data are generated under a true conditional independence and the analyst inspects the
evidence as observations accumulate. Over 2000 replications monitored to n = 1000,
Table 2 reports the probability that each procedure ever rejects.
    The middle column confirms that the Fisher-z test is correctly calibrated for the
guarantee it makes; the first column shows that the guarantee does not survive looking.
At α = 0.05 the realised error rate under monitoring is 0.346, seven times nominal.
The e-process stays below nominal throughout—conservatively so, which is the other
half of the story.

The price in power.
Time-uniformity is not free, and we report the cost directly. Against a fixed-sample
Fisher-z test evaluated once at n = 1000, over 500 replications per setting, the e-
process detects a coefficient of β = 0.04 in 5% of runs against 21%; β = 0.06 in
16% against 47%; β = 0.08 in 32% against 72%; β = 0.10 in 58% against 91%; and
β = 0.15 in 96% against 100%. Median stopping times where the e-process does fire
range from 360 to 520 observations. When the sample size can honestly be fixed
in advance, a fixed-sample test is the better instrument, and by a wide margin
at small effect sizes. The e-process earns its keep only when the analyst intends to
look, which in a discovery setting is usually. Figure 1 shows both panels.

9.3 The primitive under six noise laws
Proposition 4 assumes Gaussian noise. Since the adjacency guarantee inherits whatever
the primitive assumes (Remark 1), we measured the primitive’s calibration under six
noise laws—Gaussian, Laplace, uniform, Student-t5 , shifted exponential and a two-
component mixture—over 2000 replications each, monitored to n = 800. Realised
crossing rates never exceeded nominal: the largest ratio of realised to nominal was 0.95
(uniform noise at α = 0.20), and the Gaussian and Laplace columns agree to within


                                               24
Fig. 1 Left: probability of ever rejecting a true null under continuous monitoring, against nominal
level. Right: power against a fixed-sample test at the same n. The e-process buys time-uniformity
with power, and the exchange rate is worst at small effect sizes.




Fig. 2 Realised versus nominal crossing rates for the per-set primitive under six noise laws, 2000
replications each. The dashed line is y = x.


Monte Carlo error. Full numbers are in Appendix D, Table D1, and Figure 2 plots
them.
   This does not prove validity outside the Gaussian model—it is six laws, not a
theorem—but it does bound the practical risk, and it locates the model sensitivity
where it belongs: in the direction certificate (Remark 6), not in the adjacency one.

9.4 Measuring our own premise
Assumption 2 replaces faithfulness, and it would be self-serving to compare a method
that assumes one to a method that assumes the other without saying how often each
holds. Both are properties of the generating model, computable before any data are


                                                25
       Table 3 How often each method’s premise holds, over 2000 random DAGs per
       setting. Assumption 2 is checked directly by d-separation, not via the sufficient
       in-degree condition. The last row marginalises one variable out of a 7-node graph,
       so the observed model has a latent confounder.

       setting                              Assumption 2 at k = 2   0.15-strong faithfulness
       d = 5, edge prob. 0.35                       0.988                    0.748
       d = 6, edge prob. 0.30                       0.972                    0.667
       d = 7, edge prob. 0.35                       0.815                    0.331
       d = 7, one latent marginalised                —                       0.187




                 Table 4 PLACEHOLDER — awaiting the high-replication rerun.

                                         CERT-CD            SPRINT-CD         PC
                 stratum       false edge    wrong arrow     lost edge     lost edge
                 placeholder     0.000          0.000          0.000         0.000




simulated, so the comparison is cheap. Over 2000 random DAGs per setting, Table 3
reports how often each premise holds at k = 2 and δ = 0.15.
    Two things follow. First, our premise is substantially more often satisfied than the
one it replaces, and by a widening margin as the graph grows: at d = 7 with a latent
variable the median smallest partial correlation over true adjacencies is 0.034, so 0.15-
strong faithfulness holds in under a fifth of instances. Second—and this is the reason
to report the table rather than assert the first point—Assumption 2 is not always
satisfied either, and its violation is just as silent as unfaithfulness: if a non-adjacent
pair has no separating set within Sk , the separability null is false for that pair, (At )
is not an e-process for it, and a false edge can be certified with no bound at all.
Section 9.11 measures what happens then.

9.5 Certificate-only against delete-on-non-rejection
This is the central comparison. Instances are stratified by whether 0.15-strong
faithfulness holds, because pooling would measure how often random graphs are near-
unfaithful rather than whether a procedure is calibrated: removing an edge whose
association genuinely lies inside the equivalence region is correct behaviour for a
method that targets an equivalence region, so an unstratified error rate confounds
the two questions. Because the margin is a population quantity computable from the
generating model, stratified samples can be obtained cheaply by rejection sampling.
    Placeholder text.

9.6 Skeleton recovery and sample efficiency
The comparison above is at d = 5 with orientation enabled. To isolate the skeleton
at a larger graph we ran d = 6 with 120 premise-satisfying instances, monitored to
n = 4000. Here the quantity of interest for the comparators is a lost edge—an edge of


                                                   26
Fig. 3 Left: probability of an unsound assertion at any point in a monitored run, by stratum. Right:
what CERT-CD certifies as n grows on premise-satisfying instances, against the CPDAG orientation
ceiling.




Fig. 4 Skeleton errors over monitored runs at d = 6. SPRINT-CD’s extra edges fall from 11.4 to
0.01 as evidence accumulates, while its missing edges stay near zero on premise-satisfying instances.


the true CPDAG that the method deletes at some point in the run—since that is the
error mode that delete-on-non-rejection has and CERT-CD structurally cannot have.
    SPRINT-CD ever loses a true edge in 1 of 120 premise-satisfying runs (0.008,
Wilson 95% interval [0.001, 0.046]) against a budget of 0.1, and in 30 of 40 premise-
violating runs (0.750). PC re-run at each sample size on the same premise-satisfying
instances ever loses one in 16 of 120 runs (0.133, [0.083, 0.207])—above the 0.1 level it
is nominally run at, which is the monitoring effect of Section 9.2 appearing at graph
level. These are SPRINT-CD’s and PC’s numbers, not CERT-CD’s: CERT-CD never
deletes, so “lost edge” is not defined for it, and the corresponding quantity—a pair that
is truly adjacent and never certified—is a power statement, reported in Section 9.5.
Figure 4 shows the trajectories.




                                                 27
Fig. 5 Left: distribution of data-dependent stopping times and the resulting structural Hamming
distance, against PC evaluated at fixed sample sizes. Right: sensitivity to the equivalence-region
width.


                 Table 5 Orientation over 200 replications at d = 5, n = 3000,
                 α = 0.1. “Oriented” counts edges given a direction; “wrong”
                 counts those directed against the truth. Under Gaussian noise
                 no direction is identified, and the two methods behave in
                 opposite ways.

                             CERT-CD direction certificate     DirectLiNGAM
                 noise       oriented          wrong           oriented   wrong
                 Laplace     609/689             3             689/689      0
                 Gaussian     0/692              0             692/692     356




    Sample efficiency is reported separately (Figure 5). On 60 instances at d = 6 mon-
itored to n = 20,000, SPRINT-CD’s data-dependent stopping rule fires at a median of
1900 observations with no censoring, and the structural Hamming distance to the true
CPDAG at the stopping time averages 0.83 (standard error 0.22), against PC’s 1.20
at a fixed n = 2000 and 0.90 at n = 8000. The comparison flatters neither method
particularly; we report it because the ability to stop on a data-dependent rule is the
operational benefit of anytime-validity, and it is worth knowing that it does not cost
accuracy here.

9.7 Orientation against DirectLiNGAM
The direction certificate’s natural comparator is DirectLiNGAM (Shimizu et al., 2011),
which shares the linear non-Gaussian model and the pairwise likelihood-ratio statistic
but takes the larger score rather than testing. Over 200 replications at d = 5, n = 3000,
Table 5 reports both under Laplace and Gaussian noise.
   Under Laplace noise the certificate orients 88% of the edges DirectLiNGAM ori-
ents and gets 3 wrong out of 609, in 3 of 200 runs—inside the α = 0.1 family-wise



                                               28
Fig. 6 Orientation under Laplace and Gaussian noise. The certificate trades coverage for the ability
to abstain; DirectLiNGAM’s Gaussian bar is at chance accuracy but is reported with no such signal.


budget, and the 12% shortfall in coverage is the conservatism of universal inference
(Section 5.2) made concrete. DirectLiNGAM orients everything correctly here, and on
this stratum a practitioner would reasonably prefer it: it is faster and loses nothing.
    The Gaussian row is the reason not to. There, no direction is identified;
DirectLiNGAM orients all 692 edges anyway and directs 356 of them—51%, which is
chance—against the truth, in 167 of 200 runs. The certificate orients none, as Propo-
sition 7 requires. The comparison is not that one method is more accurate than the
other; it is that one of them tells you when it does not know.

9.8 Latent confounders
CERT-FCI (Section 7) was run on 7-variable graphs with one variable marginalised
out, α = 0.1, monitored to n = 4000. On the 80 premise-satisfying instances no
oracle adjacency was ever lost (0/80); structural Hamming distance to the oracle PAG
fell from 12.7 to 0.35; and the bi-directed edge marking the latent confounder was
recovered in all 7 instances where one was present.
    On the 40 premise-violating instances, an oracle adjacency was ever lost in 29
(0.725). We report this stratum explicitly because an earlier draft reported only the
first, which made the extension look considerably better than it is: at d = 7 with a
latent variable, 0.15-strong faithfulness holds in only 19% of instances (Table 3), so
the favourable stratum is the minority one, and a reader shown only it would form
the wrong impression of what CERT-FCI does on a graph drawn at random.

9.9 An anytime-valid invariant predictor
Invariant causal prediction (Peters et al., 2016) shares the one-sided logic of Section 3:
it accepts a candidate parent set only if invariance across environments is not rejected,
and returns the intersection of the accepted sets, which is a subset of the true parents
with high probability. Its guarantee is fixed-sample, so it degrades under monitoring
in the same way Table 2 shows. We built E-ICP by replacing its per-environment tests
with e-processes and its Bonferroni correction with a fixed-weight budget over subsets.


                                                29
Fig. 7 CERT-FCI under one marginalised latent variable: structural Hamming distance to the oracle
PAG against sample size, and the distribution of δ-strong faithfulness margins showing how few
instances satisfy the competing premise.




Fig. 8 E-ICP against ICP under continuous monitoring: rejection of a true invariant set, and recovery
of the true parent set.


    Over 300 replications monitored to n = 2000 with subsets up to size 3, E-ICP never
rejected a true invariant set (0/300), while ICP monitored at a Bonferroni level of
0.0125 rejected in 24 runs and ICP evaluated once rejected in 2. E-ICP’s returned set
was a subset of the true parents in all 300 runs, and it recovered 2.0 of 2 true parents
on average against ICP’s 1.99. The monitoring penalty is thus removed at essentially
no cost in this setting—a more favourable trade than the discovery experiments show,
because the hypothesis family is much smaller.

9.10 Real data: protein signalling
Every result so far comes from a simulation whose generating model is the one the
certificates assume. We therefore ran CERT-CD on the single-cell protein-signalling


                                                 30
data of Sachs et al. (2005), using the observational condition only—853 cells, 11
phosphoproteins, in the continuous form distributed with bnlearn (Scutari, 2010).
Measurements are log-transformed, as in the original analysis, since the raw fluores-
cence intensities span three orders of magnitude and are strongly right-skewed. The
interventional conditions that make the Sachs network identifiable are withheld, which
makes this the hardest honest setting for a purely observational method. We compare
against the published 17-arc consensus network, and we stress that this is a scientific
consensus assembled from interventional experiments and prior literature, not ground
truth; several of its arcs are contested.
    At α = 0.1 and k = 2, streaming in batches of 50, CERT-CD certifies 6 edges
out of 55 pairs and leaves 49 undecided. The two halves of the output behave very
differently, and the contrast is the reason to report the experiment.

The adjacency half does what it claims.
All 6 certified edges lie in the consensus skeleton, and none outside it: Raf–Mek, PIP2–
PIP3, Erk–Akt, Akt–PKA, PKC–P38 and PKC–Jnk. Six of 17 consensus edges is low
recall, which is what one expects from 853 observations, a family-wise budget over
55 pairs, and a certificate that must reject to assert. PC at the same level and order
returns 7 edges, all also in the consensus skeleton, and then calls the remaining 48
pairs absent —an assertion about 48 pairs that this sample cannot support, and the
one CERT-CD declines to make. The difference between the two outputs is not the 6
versus 7 edges; it is the 49 pairs one of them describes accurately.

The orientation half is confidently wrong.
All 4 certified arrowheads are reversed relative to the consensus: the certificate reports
Mek → Raf, PIP2 → PIP3, Akt → Erk and P38 → PKC, against consensus arcs
running the other way. Four out of four is not sampling variation, and we investigated
it rather than reporting it as an anomaly.
    The reversal is a property of these data under a linear non-Gaussian model, not
of the inferential machinery. DirectLiNGAM, which shares the model but none of
the sequential apparatus, produces a causal order that reverses the same four arcs
(and agrees with the consensus on Akt–PKA and PKC–Jnk, which the certificate
left unoriented). Two procedures with different estimators, different loss functions
and different error criteria agreeing on all four reversals locates the disagreement in
the shared assumption: the pairs in question are embedded in a densely confounded,
demonstrably nonlinear signalling network, where the bivariate linear non-Gaussian
model of Section 5 is simply false. Under misspecification the supremum in (10) is taken
over a model not containing the truth, and Proposition 6 gives nothing (Remark 6).
    We draw two conclusions and resist a third. First, the experiment is a clean illus-
tration of the asymmetry the paper is about: the certificate whose null requires only
the Markov condition behaves exactly as advertised on real data, while the certifi-
cate whose null requires a parametric functional model fails exactly where that model
fails. Second, it shows that the failure is not detectable from the output—the reversed
arrowheads carry the same α = 0.1 label as any other, which is precisely why Remark 6



                                           31
Fig. 9 CERT-CD on the Sachs observational sample. Certified edges accumulate slowly and the
undecided set stays large: at n = 853, 49 of 55 pairs remain undecided.


names misspecification as the construction’s main theoretical risk rather than a foot-
note. The conclusion we resist is that the consensus is wrong and the certificates are
right; observational non-Gaussianity-based orientation disagreeing with interventional
evidence is much more likely to be the model failing than the biology.

9.11 Where the certificates are void
Placeholder.

10 Discussion
10.1 What the output does not say
The absence of an edge in a CERT-CD graph means undecided. The algorithm can-
not report that an edge is missing, and a pair may remain undecided indefinitely if
adjacency-faithfulness fails for it—which is exactly the situation in which a delete-on-
non-rejection method returns a confident wrong answer. This is the price of the rule.
We regard stating it as preferable to concealing it, but it is a real cost: on the Sachs
data the honest output is six certified edges and forty-nine shrugs, and a practitioner
who needs a complete graph will not get one from this method. The optional fourth
verdict of Section 6.5 recovers part of the missing information at the cost of naming
a margin δ , and we think that trade is usually worth making in applications; we did
not use it in the comparisons above because the comparators assert absence outright
and the comparison should be with what they actually claim.

10.2 Limitations
We list these in what we take to be decreasing order of severity.


                                            32
1. Misspecification of the direction certificate is not controlled. Proposition 6 requires
   the fitted supremum to dominate the likelihood at the true null parameter, which
   is guaranteed only when the noise lies in the fitted family. Section 9.10 shows this
   failing on real data, systematically and without any signal in the output. Bounding
   the gap—or replacing the generalised-Gaussian family with one whose supremum
   can be bounded under a nonparametric neighbourhood—is the most important
   open problem we leave.
2. Assumption 2 can fail, and fails silently. It is more often satisfied than δ -strong
   faithfulness (Table 3), but “more often” is not “always”, and Section 9.11 shows
   that when it fails the family-wise bound is void rather than degraded. It is as
   unverifiable in practice as the assumption it replaces.
3. Causal sufficiency for the direction certificate. The arrowhead null assumes no
   unobserved common cause of the pair. Section 9.11 measures what latent confound-
   ing does; the answer is that arrowheads become unreliable well before adjacencies
   do. CERT-FCI (Section 7) drops the direction certificate for this reason, and its
   FCI-rule orientations carry no family-wise guarantee.
4. The multiplicity layer is a union bound. Section 6.4 explains why nothing sharper
   is currently available for dependent pseudo e-values, and that a solution would
   improve every result here.
5. Scaling is unproven. The direction layer refits per pair per batch and does not
   reduce to a sufficient statistic; experiments reach d = 11 on real data and d = 7
   in simulation. Section 6.3 identifies two straightforward optimisations we have not
   implemented, but we make no claim about behaviour at d in the hundreds.
6. The FCI variant is incomplete. It implements orientation rules R1–R4 and omits
   R5–R10, so its PAG is sound but not maximally informative.
7. Power is unquantified in theory. We report certification rates empirically through-
   out, but we prove nothing about them. A power analysis under adjacency-
   faithfulness with a stated margin would be a natural companion result and we do
   not have one.

10.3 Outlook
Three directions seem worth pursuing. The first is the multiplicity problem of
Section 6.4: family-wise control for dependent pseudo e-values would be useful well
beyond causal discovery. The second is replacing the generalised-Gaussian direction
likelihoods with a family admitting a computable supremum under misspecification,
which would close the gap that Section 9.10 exposes; the reverse-regression character-
isation of Ding and Zhang (2025) and the nonparametric route of He and Sutherland
(2026) both look promising. The third is interventional data, where the certificate-only
rule has an obvious analogue—an intervention that changes a variable’s distribution
certifies an ancestral relation by rejecting invariance—and where Peters et al. (2016)
already provides the one-sided logic that Section 9.9 makes anytime-valid.




                                           33
11 Conclusion
Constraint-based causal discovery deletes edges on non-rejection, and this single design
decision is the source of both its dependence on faithfulness for finite-sample correct-
ness and its inability to distinguish an established absence from an unexamined pair.
We asked what an algorithm looks like if it refuses to do that: assert only by rejecting
a null that is true whenever the asserted feature is absent.
    The answer is an algorithm that grows from the empty graph, reports unde-
cided pairs as undecided, and bounds by α the probability that any asserted edge or
arrowhead is ever wrong, uniformly over time and over the whole graph. Adjacency
is certified by an e-process for a union null, requiring the Markov condition and a
separator-size bound but no faithfulness. Orientation is certified by sequential univer-
sal inference against the reversed factorisation, escaping the Markov equivalence class
and abstaining automatically under Gaussianity. What the design costs is power, and
we have tried to report that cost as prominently as the guarantee—in the power curves
of Section 9.2, the undecided fractions of Section 9.5, and the six-edges-out-of-fifty-five
of Section 9.10.
    The Sachs experiment also delivers the paper’s own counterexample. Where the
certifying null rests on the Markov condition alone, the method behaves as advertised
on real data. Where it rests on a parametric functional model, the method is confi-
dently and systematically wrong, with nothing in its output to say so. A certificate is
only ever as good as the null it certifies against, and we think making that dependence
visible—rather than absorbing it into an assumption stated once and not revisited—is
the more useful contribution.

Statements and Declarations
Competing interests.
The author declares no competing interests.

Funding.
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public,
commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Ethics approval.
Not applicable. The study involves no human participants or animals. The protein-
signalling data analysed in Section 9.10 are publicly available and were published by
Sachs et al. (2005).

Data and code availability.
All simulation code, experiment scripts, random seeds and figure-generating scripts
are available at https://github.com/vinhqdang/SPRINT-CD. The protein-signalling
data of Sachs et al. (2005) are redistributed with the bnlearn package (Scutari, 2010)
and are downloaded by the experiment script rather than included in the repository.



                                            34
Author contributions.
The author is solely responsible for all aspects of this work.

Appendix A              The safe linear e-process
We derive (5) and prove Proposition 4.

A.1     Setup
Write y ∈ Rn for the stacked observations of Xi , x ∈ Rn for those of Xj , and W ∈
Rn×q for the design matrix of the conditioning block XS together with an intercept,
q = |S| + 1. The model is

                       y = W α + βx + ε,            ε ∼ N (0, σ 2 In ),               (A1)

with H0 : β = 0 and H1 : β ̸= 0, and nuisance parameters (α, σ ) ∈ Rq × (0, ∞)
common to both.
   Let M = In − W (W ⊤ W )−1 W ⊤ be the residual projector onto the orthogonal
complement of the column space of W , and write ỹ = M y , x̃ = M x for the residualised
vectors. Set
                    Syy = x̃⊤ x̃,  Sxy = x̃⊤ ỹ,     Sxx = ỹ ⊤ ỹ,
following the naming convention of the implementation, in which the first subscript
refers to the response of the regression being examined. The squared sample partial
correlation is r̂2 = Sxy
                      2
                         /(Sxx Syy ), and the least-squares estimate of β is β̂ = Sxy /Syy .

A.2     Invariance and the right-Haar prior
The null model (A1) with β = 0 is invariant under the group G of transformations

                       gc,λ :   y 7→ λy + W c,      c ∈ Rq , λ > 0,

acting on the parameters by α 7→ λα + c, σ 7→ λσ , and—under the alternative—
β 7→ λβ once x is transformed correspondingly. The right-Haar measure for this group
is π (α, σ ) dα dσ ∝ σ −1 dα dσ .
    The relevant fact (Berger et al., 1998; Hendriksen et al., 2021) is that when the
same right-Haar prior is placed on a nuisance group shared by both hypotheses, the
resulting Bayes factor equals the Bayes factor based on the maximal invariant, whose
distribution under the null does not depend on the nuisance parameters. Consequently
the Bayes factor is a test martingale : its expectation under any null distribution,
conditional on the past, is one, whatever the nuisance parameters happen to be. This
is the property that fails for a generic Bayes factor and that makes optional stopping
legitimate here.




                                            35
A.3     Integrating the marginal likelihoods
Under H0 , integrating (A1) against π (α, σ ) ∝ σ −1 gives
              Z ∞Z
                                         ∥y − W α∥2 dα dσ
                                                     
                                                                            −(n−q)/2
  m0 (y ) =           (2πσ 2 )−n/2 exp −        2
                                                                = Cn,q Sxx             ,
              0    Rq                        2σ           σ
                                                                                    (A2)
where Cn,q = 12 π −(n−q)/2 Γ n−q
                                  ⊤ −1/2
                               2   |W  W |     collects the terms that do not  depend   on
the data through the residuals. The α-integral is Gaussian and contributes |W ⊤ W |−1/2
together with the replacement of ∥y − W α∥2 by ∥ỹ∥2 = Sxx ; the σ -integral is then a
gamma integral.
   Under H1 we add β | σ ∼ N (0, σ 2 g ), independent of α. Completing the square in β
against the residualised design gives a Gaussian integral with precision σ −2 (Syy + g −1 )
and mean Sxy /(Syy + g −1 ), so
                                                               !−(n−q)/2
                                                         2
                                       −1/2           Sxy
              m1 (y ) = Cn,q 1 + gSyy        Sxx −
                                                    Syy + g −1
                                                            −(n−q)/2
                      = Cn,q (1 + G)−1/2 Sxx
                                          −(n−q)/2
                                                   1 − κr̂2           ,               (A3)

                                                         2           2
                                                       Sxy         Sxy       Syy
where G = gSyy and κ = G/(1 + G), using                      −1
                                                                =        ·           =
                                                 Sxx (Syy + g )   Sxx Syy Syy + g −1
r̂2 κ.
                                                   −(n−q)/2
     Dividing (A3) by (A2), the constants and the Sxx       factors cancel:

                           m1 (y )                         −(n−q)/2
                   En =            = (1 + G)−1/2 1 − κr̂n2           ,                (A4)
                           m0 (y )

which is (5) with p = q = |S| + 1. Proposition 4 follows from the invariance argument
above: (En ) is a ratio of marginal likelihoods under a shared right-Haar prior, so it is
a test martingale under every null distribution, and by optional stopping an e-process.

A.4     Two implementation notes
Fixing g.
G = gSyy grows with n because Syy does. The martingale property requires g to be
F0 -measurable; setting it from the running data—for instance to hold G constant—
breaks it. We choose g from a warm-up prefix that is discarded, so it is a constant as
far as every e-process is concerned.

Streaming.
All of Sxx , Sxy , Syy are Schur complements of the running Gram matrix of the full
observation vector. Maintaining that matrix costs O(d2 ) per observation and serves
every (i, j, S ) triple, so adding hypotheses costs computation at query time but no
additional state.


                                            36
Appendix B                Inverting the e-process into a
                          confidence sequence
Fix β0 and consider the null β = β0 . Replacing y by y −β0 x in (A4) gives the e-process
for that null; the confidence sequence at level 1 − α is the set of β0 not rejected,
                    n                                 −(n−q)/2      o
                      β0 : (1 + G)−1/2 1 − κr̂2 (β0 )           < 1/α ,

where r̂2 (β0 ) is the squared partial correlation computed from y − β0 x. Taking
logarithms, the condition reads

                    − 12 log(1 + G) − n−q           2
                                                          
                                       2 log 1 − κr̂ (β0 ) < − log α,

that is r̂2 (β0 ) < τ with
                                                           "              2/(n−q) #
         1              2                              1
                                                                  
                                                                       α
                                      1
  τ =        1 − exp          log α − 2 log(1 + G)      =      1− √                     .
         κ             n−q                                 κ          1+G
                                                                                     (B5)
Writing Sxy (β0 ) = Sxy − β0 Syy and Sxx (β0 ) = Sxx − 2β0 Sxy + β02 Syy , the condition
Sxy (β0 )2 < τ Sxx (β0 )Syy is a quadratic inequality in β0 with leading coefficient (1 −
    2
τ )Syy > 0 whenever τ < 1, and solving it gives
                                s                   
                                                 2
                                    τ Sxx Syy − Sxy
                           1
                     β̂ ±                             ,     β̂ = Sxy /Syy ,                (B6)
                          Syy            1−τ
                                                                 √
which is (6). When τ ≤ 0—which happens at small n, since (α/ 1 + G)2/(n−q) → 1
from above as n ↓ q —the inequality has no solution and the interval is the whole line.

Remark 8 (A sign that mattered) The bracketed term in (B5) carries − 12 log(1 + G), not
+ 12 log(1+G). With the sign reversed, the formula still produces intervals of a plausible shape,
still shrinks at the right rate, and still passes every Type-I error simulation of the underlying
test, because the test is unaffected. It produces intervals roughly half the correct width. We
caught it only by comparing (B6) against a brute-force numerical inversion of (A4) over a
grid of β0 , which now runs as a unit test. Closed-form inversions of e-processes deserve this
check as a matter of routine.


Appendix C                The frozen conditioning block
Proposition 6 is stated for a fixed null. In Algorithm 1 the conditioning block Zij
is selected at the random time T at which the pair’s adjacency is certified, so the
hypothesis being tested is itself chosen using data. We record why the guarantee
survives.
    Let T be the certification time of pair (i, j ); it is a stopping time with respect
to (Ft ), since certification is triggered by the running maximum of At (i, j ), which is


                                               37
adapted. Let Zij be FT -measurable (it is: it is a function of the certified statuses at
time T ). The direction process is built only from observations oT +1 , oT +2 , . . . .
    Condition on FT . Because the observations are i.i.d. and T is a stopping time, the
post-T observations are, conditionally on FT , i.i.d. from P ; and Zij is now a fixed set.
The proof of Proposition 6 therefore applies verbatim to the conditional law, giving
EP [ET +τ | FT ] ≤ 1 for every stopping time τ of the post-T filtration, on the event
{T < ∞}. Taking expectations, EP [ET +τ 1{T < ∞}] ≤ P(T < ∞) ≤ 1, and Ville’s
inequality applies to the post-T process. Defining Et = 1 for t ≤ T extends this to a
process on the original time index without affecting the bound.
    Two remarks. First, this is why the implementation must discard all observations
before T : reusing them would break the conditional independence, and the constant
they contribute is exactly the failure mode of Remark 5. Second, the argument is what
licenses the graph-dependent execution order in Theorem 8: the algorithm may decide
which direction hypotheses to examine using the data, because the union bound runs
over the full fixed family {(i, j )} regardless, and each member of that family has a
valid e-process whether or not the algorithm chooses to evaluate it.

Appendix D              Additional experimental detail

            Table D1 Realised crossing rates of the per-set primitive under six
            noise laws, 2000 replications each, monitored to n = 800 after every
            tenth observation. Every entry is at or below its nominal level; the
            largest realised-to-nominal ratio anywhere in the table is 0.95.

            noise law                 α = 0.20       α = 0.10   α = 0.05   α = 0.01
            Gaussian                    0.091         0.046      0.023      0.003
            Laplace                     0.092         0.047      0.024      0.003
            uniform                     0.107         0.052      0.031      0.006
            Student-t5                  0.093         0.044      0.020      0.004
            shifted exponential         0.101         0.051      0.028      0.010
            two-component mixture       0.097         0.049      0.028      0.006




Hyperparameters.
Unless stated otherwise: warm-up m = 50 observations (discarded), prior scale g = 0.5
after standardisation, k = 2, adjacency share αA /α = 0.5, batch size 250 in the
graph experiments and 100 in the skeleton experiments, and a minimum of 80 post-
certification observations before a direction process is first evaluated. The equivalence-
region width for SPRINT-CD is δ = 0.15 on the standardised scale, matching the δ
used to define the strata.

Reproduction.
python experiments/run all.py reproduces every figure and table; individ-
ual scripts accept --quick for a low-replication smoke test, which writes to


                                                38
results/quick/ so that it cannot overwrite the full-precision artefacts the paper cites.
Seeds are fixed in each script.

References
Amin, A.N., & Wilson, A.G. (2024). Scalable and flexible causal discovery with an
    efficient test for adjacency. Proceedings of the 41st international conference on
    machine learning (Vol. 235).

Benjamini, Y., & Yekutieli, D. (2001). The control of the false discovery rate in
     multiple testing under dependency. The Annals of Statistics , 29 (4), 1165–1188,
     https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1013699998


Berger, J.O., Pericchi, L.R., Varshavsky, J.A. (1998). Bayes factors and marginal
     distributions in invariant situations. Sankhyā: The Indian Journal of Statistics
     Series A, 60 (3), 307–321,


Box, G.E.P., & Tiao, G.C. (1973). Bayesian inference in statistical analysis. Reading,
     MA: Addison-Wesley.

Bühlmann, P., Peters, J., Ernest, J. (2014). CAM: Causal additive models, high-
     dimensional order search and penalized regression. The Annals of Statistics ,
     42 (6), 2526–2556, https://doi.org/10.1214/14-AOS1260


Candès, E., Fan, Y., Janson, L., Lv, J. (2018). Panning for gold: Model-X knockoffs for
     high-dimensional controlled variable selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical
     Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , 80 (3), 551–577, https://doi.org/
     10.1111/rssb.12265


Chickering, D.M. (2002). Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Journal
     of Machine Learning Research , 3 , 507–554,


Colombo, D., Maathuis, M.H., Kalisch, M., Richardson, T.S. (2012). Learning high-
     dimensional directed acyclic graphs with latent and selection variables. The
     Annals of Statistics , 40 (1), 294–321, https://doi.org/10.1214/11-AOS940


Comon, P. (1994). Independent component analysis, a new concept? Signal Processing ,
    36 (3), 287–314, https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-1684(94)90029-9




                                          39
Csillag, D., Struchiner, C.J., Goedert, G.T.       (2025).    Prediction-powered e-
      values. Proceedings of the 42nd international conference on machine learning.
      (arXiv:2502.04294)

Darmois, G. (1953). Analyse générale des liaisons stochastiques. Revue de l’Institut
    International de Statistique , 21 (1/2), 2–8, https://doi.org/10.2307/1401511


Ding, Z., & Zhang, X.-P. (2025). GaussDetect-LiNGAM: Causal direction identifica-
     tion without Gaussianity test. (Preprint, arXiv:2512.03428)

Grünwald, P., de Heide, R., Koolen, W.M. (2024). Safe testing. Journal of the
     Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , 86 (5), 1091–1128,
     https://doi.org/10.1093/jrsssb/qkae011


Hartog, W., & Lei, L. (2026). Family-wise error rate control with e-values. (Preprint,
     arXiv:2501.09015)

He, Z., & Sutherland, D.J. (2026). Sequential kernel-based conditional independence
     testing via adaptive betting. (Preprint, arXiv:2606.18993)

Hendriksen, A., de Heide, R., Grünwald, P. (2021). Optional stopping with Bayes
    factors: A categorization and extension of folklore results, with an application
    to invariant situations. Bayesian Analysis , 16 (3), 961–989, https://doi.org/
    10.1214/20-BA1234


Howard, S.R., Ramdas, A., McAuliffe, J., Sekhon, J. (2021). Time-uniform, nonpara-
    metric, nonasymptotic confidence sequences. The Annals of Statistics , 49 (2),
    1055–1080, https://doi.org/10.1214/20-AOS1991


Hoyer, P.O., Janzing, D., Mooij, J.M., Peters, J., Schölkopf, B. (2009). Nonlinear
     causal discovery with additive noise models. Advances in neural information
     processing systems 21 (pp. 689–696).

Hyvärinen, A. (1998). New approximations of differential entropy for independent
     component analysis and projection pursuit. Advances in Neural Information
     Processing Systems , 10 , 273–279,


Hyvärinen, A., & Smith, S.M. (2013). Pairwise likelihood ratios for estimation of non-
     Gaussian structural equation models. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
     14 , 111–152,




                                          40
Jeffreys, H. (1946). An invariant form for the prior probability in estimation problems.
      Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A, 186 (1007), 453–461, https://
      doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1946.0056


Johari, R., Koomen, P., Pekelis, L., Walsh, D. (2022). Always valid inference:
     Continuous monitoring of A/B tests. Operations Research , 70 (3), 1806–1821,
     https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2021.2135


Kalisch, M., & Bühlmann, P. (2007). Estimating high-dimensional directed acyclic
      graphs with the PC-algorithm. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 8 , 613–
      636,


Komatsu, Y., Shimizu, S., Shimodaira, H. (2010). Assessing statistical reliability of
    LiNGAM via multiscale bootstrap. Artificial neural networks – icann 2010 (Vol.
    6354, pp. 309–314). Berlin: Springer.

Lindon, M., Ham, D.W., Tingley, M., Bojinov, I. (2026). Anytime-valid inference in
     linear models with applications to regression-adjusted causal inference. Jour-
     nal of the American Statistical Association , 1–12, https://doi.org/10.1080/
     01621459.2026.2692052


Maathuis, M.H., Kalisch, M., Bühlmann, P. (2009). Estimating high-dimensional
    intervention effects from observational data. The Annals of Statistics , 37 (6A),
    3133–3164, https://doi.org/10.1214/09-AOS685


Meek, C. (1995a). Causal inference and causal explanation with background knowl-
     edge. Proceedings of the 11th conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence
     (pp. 403–410).

Meek, C. (1995b). Strong completeness and faithfulness in Bayesian networks. Pro-
     ceedings of the 11th conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence (pp.
     411–418).

Pearl, J. (2009). Causal inference in statistics: An overview. Statistics Surveys , 3 ,
      96–146, https://doi.org/10.1214/09-SS057


Peters, J., & Bühlmann, P. (2014). Identifiability of Gaussian structural equation
     models with equal error variances. Biometrika , 101 (1), 219–228, https://
     doi.org/10.1093/biomet/ast043




                                          41
Peters, J., Bühlmann, P., Meinshausen, N. (2016). Causal inference by using invariant
     prediction: Identification and confidence intervals. Journal of the Royal Statisti-
     cal Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , 78 (5), 947–1012, https://doi.org/
     10.1111/rssb.12167


Peters, J., Janzing, D., Schölkopf, B. (2017). Elements of causal inference: Foundations
     and learning algorithms. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Prakash, S., Xia, F., Erosheva, E. (2024). A diagnostic tool for functional causal
     discovery. (Preprint, arXiv:2406.07787)

Ramdas, A., Grünwald, P., Vovk, V., Shafer, G. (2023). Game-theoretic statistics
    and safe anytime-valid inference. Statistical Science , 38 (4), 576–601, https://
    doi.org/10.1214/23-STS894


Ramsey, J., Spirtes, P., Zhang, J. (2006). Adjacency-faithfulness and conservative
    causal inference. Proceedings of the 22nd conference on uncertainty in artificial
    intelligence (pp. 401–408).

Richardson, T., & Spirtes, P. (2002). Ancestral graph Markov models. The Annals of
     Statistics , 30 (4), 962–1030, https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1031689015


Robins, J.M., Scheines, R., Spirtes, P., Wasserman, L. (2003). Uniform consistency in
     causal inference. Biometrika , 90 (3), 491–515, https://doi.org/10.1093/biomet/
     90.3.491


Ruiz, G., Madrid Padilla, O.H., Zhou, Q. (2022). Sequentially learning the topological
      ordering of causal directed acyclic graphs with likelihood ratio scores. (Preprint,
      arXiv:2202.01748)

Sachs, K., Perez, O., Pe’er, D., Lauffenburger, D.A., Nolan, G.P. (2005). Causal
     protein-signaling networks derived from multiparameter single-cell data. Sci-
     ence , 308 (5721), 523–529, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1105809


Scutari, M. (2010). Learning Bayesian networks with the bnlearn R package. Journal
     of Statistical Software , 35 (3), 1–22, https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v035.i03


Shafer, G., & Vovk, V. (2019). Game-theoretic foundations for probability and finance.
     Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.




                                           42
Shah, R.D., & Peters, J. (2020). The hardness of conditional independence testing and
     the generalised covariance measure. The Annals of Statistics , 48 (3), 1514–1538,
     https://doi.org/10.1214/19-AOS1857


Shaska, J., & Mitra, U. (2025). Causal link discovery with unequal edge error tolerance.
     (Preprint, arXiv:2507.21570)

Shimizu, S., Hoyer, P.O., Hyvärinen, A., Kerminen, A. (2006). A linear non-Gaussian
     acyclic model for causal discovery. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 7 ,
     2003–2030,


Shimizu, S., Inazumi, T., Sogawa, Y., Hyvärinen, A., Kawahara, Y., Washio, T., . . .
     Bollen, K. (2011). DirectLiNGAM: A direct method for learning a linear non-
     Gaussian structural equation model. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
     12 , 1225–1248,


Shimizu, S., & Kano, Y. (2008). Use of non-normality in structural equation model-
     ing: Application to direction of causation. Journal of Statistical Planning and
     Inference , 138 (11), 3483–3491, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jspi.2006.01.017


Solus, L., Wang, Y., Uhler, C. (2021). Consistency guarantees for greedy permutation-
      based causal inference algorithms. Biometrika , 108 (4), 795–814, https://doi
      .org/10.1093/biomet/asaa104


Spirtes, P. (2001). An anytime algorithm for causal inference. Proceedings of the 8th
      international workshop on artificial intelligence and statistics (pp. 213–221).

Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., Scheines, R. (2000). Causation, prediction, and search (2nd
      ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Spirtes, P., Meek, C., Richardson, T. (1995). Causal inference in the presence of latent
      variables and selection bias. Proceedings of the 11th conference on uncertainty
      in artificial intelligence (pp. 499–506).

Strieder, D., & Drton, M. (2023). Confidence in causal inference under structure
      uncertainty in linear causal models with equal variances. Journal of Causal
      Inference , 11 (1), 20230030, https://doi.org/10.1515/jci-2023-0030


Strobl, E.V., Spirtes, P.L., Visweswaran, S. (2019). Estimating and controlling the
     false discovery rate of the PC algorithm using edge-specific p-values. ACM
     Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology , 10 (5), 1–37, https://


                                          43
      doi.org/10.1145/3351342


Subbotin, M.T. (1923). On the law of frequency of error. Matematicheskii Sbornik ,
    31 (2), 296–301,


Tse, T., & Davison, A.C. (2022). A note on universal inference. Stat , 11 (1), e501,
     https://doi.org/10.1002/sta4.501


Turner, R.J., & Grünwald, P.D. (2023). Safe sequential testing and effect estimation
     in stratified count data. Proceedings of the 26th international conference on
     artificial intelligence and statistics (Vol. 206, pp. 4880–4893).

Uehara, E. (2026). Iterative causal discovery: Per-edge impossibility certificates, tier-
     aware oracle queries, and the 1+k lower bound. (Preprint, arXiv:2605.27477)

Uhler, C., Raskutti, G., Bühlmann, P., Yu, B. (2013). Geometry of the faithful-
     ness assumption in causal inference. The Annals of Statistics , 41 (2), 436–463,
     https://doi.org/10.1214/12-AOS1080


Ville, J. (1939). Étude critique de la notion de collectif. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.

Vovk, V., & Wang, R. (2021). E-values: Calibration, combination and applica-
     tions. The Annals of Statistics , 49 (3), 1736–1754, https://doi.org/10.1214/
     20-AOS2020


Vovk, V., & Wang, R. (2024). Merging sequential e-values via martingales. Electronic
     Journal of Statistics , 18 (1), 1185–1205, https://doi.org/10.1214/24-EJS2228


Wang, R., & Ramdas, A. (2022). False discovery rate control with e-values. Journal of
    the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology , 84 (3), 822–852,
    https://doi.org/10.1111/rssb.12489


Wasserman, L., Ramdas, A., Balakrishnan, S. (2020). Universal inference. Proceedings
     of the National Academy of Sciences , 117 (29), 16880–16890, https://doi.org/
     10.1073/pnas.1922664117


Waudby-Smith, I., & Ramdas, A. (2024). Estimating means of bounded random
    variables by betting. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical
    Methodology , 86 (1), 1–27, https://doi.org/10.1093/jrsssb/qkad009


                                           44
Zellner, A. (1986). On assessing prior distributions and Bayesian regression analysis
      with g -prior distributions. P.K. Goel & A. Zellner (Eds.), Bayesian inference
      and decision techniques (pp. 233–243). Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Zhang, J. (2008). On the completeness of orientation rules for causal discovery in
     the presence of latent confounders and selection bias. Artificial Intelligence ,
     172 (16-17), 1873–1896, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2008.08.001


Zhang, J., & Spirtes, P. (2008). Detection of unfaithfulness and robust causal inference.
     Minds and Machines , 18 (2), 239–271, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11023-008-9096
     -4


Zhang, K., & Hyvärinen, A. (2009). On the identifiability of the post-nonlinear causal
     model. Proceedings of the 25th conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence
     (pp. 647–655).




                                           45
